KEP-6012: Add initial KEP docs for CompositePodGroup API (#6017)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/6012-composite-podgroup-api/README.md

Reviewer: What's the plan for rescheduling, esp for heterogeneous multi-layered pod group? Essentially, this has the same scheduling difficulty with a heterogeneous pod group - even if the scheduler cannot find the placement, it might be just because of the scheduling order. For now, we are saying that "we do not support workload with various pods nicely". But, I need to bring this up again.

The question here is - What are we going to explain for heterogeneous multi-layered pod groups? The first step would likely be the same - just say "we do not support such heterogeneous ones nicely right now". But, what should we do in long term? I am asking this because I imagine "composite pod group with various pod groups" would be more usually-possible scenarios than "one pod group with various pods". So, we cannot just keep saying "we do not support heterogeneous multi-layered pod group". We need a good path evolving the scheduling to support them nicely.

Reviewer 2: Yes and no.

I would like to evolve towards considering more options in somewhat combinatoric/randomized way in the future.
But that will only increase the probability of finding the place if it's possible - given the NP nature of the problem we will simply not solve that fully. No matter how hard we try, we will never get to 100% guarantee here.

Author: Added a section containing a discussion of this problem (`Suboptimal scheduling decisions`), PTAL.

Reviewer: @mm4tt any thoughts? I think KEP doesn't mention much about rescheduling part, like when we should and should not retry, and how we can retry in a way it could be more likely to get scheduled next.

Reviewer: > But that will only increase the probability of finding the place if it's possible - given the NP nature of the problem we will simply not solve that fully. No matter how hard we try, we will never get to 100% guarantee here.

Yes, I know it is impossible to solve 100%. 
But, my point is that our doc says "For heterogeneous Pod groups, finding a valid placement is not guaranteed" now, and this will stay true. But, this feature will actually expand pod group in a way that it can have more various podgroups. Like, from a user perspective, it is difficult to judge how much complexity a PodGroup can have while still maintaining a reasonable chance of successful scheduling, and at what point it becomes nearly impossible.

Reviewer 3: Regarding the "rescheduling" (the way you defined it) aspect, my view is that we shouldn't try to address this by building complex out-of-band rescheduling or retry loops. 

Instead, our primary goal must be to ensure that the scheduler makes optimal decisions in common cases. As long as the user designs their workload in a reasonable way, they should be able to expect the scheduler to do a good job out of the box.

Whether the scheduler achieves this by running simulations inside a single active cycle or across multiple passes is an implementation detail. However, implementing bounded backtracking heuristics is far simpler and more performant to achieve locally within a single cycle's in-memory simulation. 

In my opinion, as long as the following two conditions are met (both of which are completely under the user control):
* **A) Individual `PodGroups` are homogeneous:** (i.e. containing pods of identical sizes and placement constraints).
* **B) The number of distinct templates (different types of PG/CPG inside the Workload) is "small"**

We can make the scheduler solve this placement problem reasonably at runtime because:
1. Leaf `PodGroup` scheduling becomes simple and optimal: When a single leaf `PodGroup` is homogeneous, scheduling it is no longer NP-hard. A standard greedy, linear approach (pod-by-pod) is guaranteed to find an optimal placement for that group.
2. Structured Search Space at the Group-Template Level: While scheduling multiple heterogeneous child groups remains NP-hard, we can reduce the search space. Because the number of distinct group templates is small, we can group identical PG/CPG objects by their "type" (template) and limit backtracking strictly to this template-level space. For example, in LWS, we only need to backtrack the placement decisions for the Leader group; the remaining homogeneous Workers can then be placed greedily without any backtracking. This prevents combinatorial explosion and makes the algorithm computationally feasible, while maintaining high-quality scheduling decisions.

Of course, we will analyze these heuristics and their trade-offs in much more detail for the Beta phase.

What do you think of this direction? If this sounds reasonable, I can update the "##### Suboptimal scheduling decisions" section in the KEP to explicitly document this.

Reviewer: Two points here - (1) how we can improve our retry mechanism and (2) what we should recommend to users.

>  they should be able to expect the scheduler to do a good job out of the box.

This is regarding (1), and where does KEP mention about what we would do when the scheduling fails? How do we determine (or whether we can determine) if the scheduling fails because of the scheduling order or not? If it did, we need some shuffling of pod (or child PG) order and retry. If it did not, PG/CPG should remain in unsched pod pool and wait for QHint to wake them up.

Is there any mention about such future improvement on this KEP? (I am not saying this must be done for alpha) Actually, maybe this should be on podgroup KEP, rather than this KEP though. 

> B) The number of distinct templates (different types of PG/CPG inside the Workload) is "small"

This is regarding (2) - So, the point is "how small", right? Can we somehow define some exact "recommended" number actually and build our scheduler-perf scenario for that number? to say "this num of distinct templates is tested and confirmed that it would likely have a reasonable chance of successful scheduling at this and that scale" on the doc.  That would be a clear guideline for users when they need to build CPG with such a complexity.

Reviewer 3: Regarding (1): The multi-pod placement problem is NP-hard. Even determining whether a valid evaluation order even exists is an NP-hard decision problem itself. So, we cannot reliably distinguish between "scheduling fails because of the scheduling order or not" without exploring the exponential search space. Therefore, I don't think that building a deterministic reshuffling or retry mechanism is computationally feasible.

Regarding (2): To provide concrete recommendations for users, understand the actual runtime performance characteristics, and determine what can be optimized (and at what cost), we first need to build the foundational algorithms, run benchmarks and get users feedback. In my opinion gathering this empirical data is exactly what the Alpha phase is for. I'm happy to clarify that we will address all of this (including defining user recommendations for workload structure) in the Beta graduation criteria.

Let me know if this approach makes sense to you.

Reviewer: > Even determining whether a valid evaluation order even exists is an NP-hard decision problem itsel

We don't need to determine. We only need to see whether it "_might_" be due to the scheduling order or not. If we are not sure, we should retry with a different order anyways. 

For a very simple scenario, if the pod group is completely homogeneous, we can say the scheduling order doesn't matter. If it is unschedulable, changing the order of scheduling won't change anything. There could be such scenarios, which we are sure that retrying in a different order won't help.

Also, another discussion to make is what we shuold do with backoff time. We define the backoff time as "the penalty to waste the scheduling cycle". In the light of that definition, should we simply increase the backoff time as we do in case of unfortunate unschedulable that might be caused by the scheduling order? 
Though there's a discussion about the backoff time, in general.

> . I'm happy to clarify that we will address all of this (including defining user recommendations for workload structure) in the Beta graduation criteria.

Yes, I am not saying that these have to be addressed for alpha. Please just put on the beta graduation so that we won't forget.

Reviewer 4: Updated beta graduation criteria with better diagnostics and recommendations regarding scheduling order.

Reviewer 2: Just a clarifying point about "number of distinct templates is small".

Even that is not true. It requires a bit of gymnastics to create a scenarios, but even if you assume just two distinct templates (say leader and workers), we may not find the right solution.

Given we're greedily choosing place for every single pod, you can come up with a situation, when e.g. the only order in which the placement can be found for 1 leader and N workers is:
`W, W, W, ... W, L, W, W, ..., W`
With 1 leader and N workers the number of combinations is still linear, but if we take A leaders and B workers, that's not true anymore.

And this was exactly my point - even for structures that look simple, there you can construct malicious cases in which we will just not find the placement unless we search the whole space (which we obviously won't).

I'm happy to continue this discussion for Beta, but my point is that the only thing that we will be able to tell the users with full confidence is: "if your has more than 1 template, we can't guarantee we will find a place for you".

Reviewer: Let me replay this words from me-
> Two points here - (1) how we can improve our retry mechanism and (2) what we should recommend to users.

I understand you. You are not incorrect, but you are just saying that the current algo cannot say "1 leader and N workers have a big enough chance to get scheduled". 
But, e.g., let's say this is LWS with just 1 leader plus just 2 workers - I guess we can say this (C)PG has a "fairly big enough" chance to get scheduled. Then, how about 3 workers? how about 2 leaders? how about 3 pod groups with different pod spec? So, the question for (2) is what is a reasonable boarder for each parameter impacting the scheduling difficulty. It is fine that we have a very conservative suggestion there for now.

And, we can improve our algo to expand the scenarios that we can say have a big enough chance similarly - that is (1). We should try to improve our algo, based on some typical usecases that we have. For example, I believe it is technically doable to improve our algo to handle LWS nicely even with M leaders / N workers, if we assume leaders are the same, workers are the same, and leaders and workers just require GPU without any fancier scheduling constraints.

Reviewer 2: I'm all for improving the algorithm further in Beta (as I already mentioned above).
I also agree that we should be able to have something that works reasonable for typical usecases.

The only contention point is where the boundary is - I agree that for LWS case, we can probably make it work for 1 leader and N workers for reasonble N. But once we get to M leaders and N workers - I'm fairly sure that if leaders and workers have different shapes, we will not be able to provide any reasonable guarantees.

We should work on improving for typical usecases - but my point is we will not solve it.

Reviewer: Again, I am not trying to solve it. 

I am just saying-

> The only contention point is where the boundary is 

we need to make this boundary clearer for each typical scenario, both for users and for us. Let's say a big customer is saying like "hey, I need to run this sorta-complicated LWS, can we do that", then you would just say "I don't know", if we would just go this way.
We should have a "visible" boundary for this user to estimate how difficult your LWS (etc) scheduling would be, and also for maintainers to keep improving each typical scenario scheduling. 

> I'm fairly sure that if leaders and workers have different shapes, we will not be able to provide any reasonable guarantees.

I mean, you are correct. I've never (and ever) said we should try to solve the NP hard problem. If leaders and workers have "too many number" of different shapes, then we cannot, and will never be able to, guarantee anything. What I keep saying is that, the point is how many is "too many number". Unless we measure and make our limitation visible, we cannot improve our limitation. 
Even if today we find we could only say "1 leader with 5 workers can work with a good enough probability, otherwise we cannot guarantee", that's fine and that would be a good start line for us to think, for example, how we can support more workers, and then we'd implement something and measure the limitation again with a hope that we could now say "1 leader with 10 workers can work". 
The improvement cannot be done with a solid way to measure whether the improvement has worked.

Reviewer 2: > We should have a "visible" boundary for this user to estimate how difficult your LWS (etc) scheduling would be, and also for maintainers to keep improving each typical scenario scheduling.

+1 - I'm all for attempting to quantify that better and improve further.
I'm just saying that it will not be black or white - there will be different flavors of "grey" on this picture.

> Unless we measure and make our limitation visible, we cannot improve our limitation.

+1

> Even if today we find we could only say "1 leader with 5 workers can work with a good enough probability, otherwise we cannot guarantee", that's fine and that would be a good start line for us to think, for example, how we can support more workers, and then we'd implement something and measure the limitation again with a hope that we could now say "1 leader with 10 workers can work".
The improvement cannot be done with a solid way to measure whether the improvement has worked.

+1

I think we're on the same page - we're just looking on the same thing from a different angles and thus describing it differently.

Reviewer 2: Or clarifying it further - this fragment it the core to me;

> 1 leader with 5 workers can work with a good enough probability, otherwise we cannot guarantee

The *probability* word is the most important here.
There will be a lot about "probability" here - we should still quantify it, but for many reasonable cases, we will not be able to say with 100% confidence. It still means we should try to measure/estimate it and improve - and here I'm 100% aligned with you.

pattern[^3]. I would like for this workload to be scheduled as soon as at least
M prefill groups and N decode groups are all schedulable together as one
compound gang.

#### Preempting an AI inference workload

As a machine learning engineer who deployed an AI model distributed into
multi-Pod shards, I want to make sure that at least N shards are running - if
it's not feasible, then I would like to preempt the whole serving workload
representing the model. In addition, if a Pod from a shard requires to be
preempted, then the whole shard gets preempted.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

TODO

## Design Details

### API overview

We introduce the `CompositePodGroup` API as the main building block for
representing multi-level, hierarchical workloads. As the naming suggests, this
API acts as a grouping entity for either `PodGroup` objects or, recursively, the

> `CompositePodGroup` objects. In other words, hierarchical workloads can be now

Reviewer 2: Can a single CompositePodGroup contain both PodGroups and CompositePodGroups at the same time?

Author: The template structure in the `Workload` object is going to enforce that a CPG can contain PGs only or CPGs only through the use of DV-based validation.

While I imagine there might be a use case where one wants to schedule a hierarchical workload with a flat workload (e.g. an LWS + a Job) together as a group gang, you could still satisfy this requirement using the currently envisioned API - it would be enough to simply wrap the flat workload inside an additional CPG (on top of the flat workload's PG) with `minGroupCount` set to 1.

The alternative, i.e. allowing PGs and CPGs simultaneously as children groups for a single CPG would complicate the validation (and IMHO the API itself, too). 

Does that make sense?

Reviewer 2: After discussion offline, I think we're leaning towards the opposite actually?

Reviewer 5: I think, we should consider supporting this in the future.
Use-cases might emerge when folks want to orchestrate LWS + Jobs within a single TrainJob for RL
cc @astefanutti @tenzen-y

Author: >After discussion offline, I think we're leaning towards the opposite actually?

Yes:) changed the wording to reflect this in the KEP's readme accordingly.

expressed as a tree of groups where `CompositePodGroup` objects correspond to
non-leaf nodes and `PodGroup` objects correspond to leaf nodes. To maintain the
tree structure, groups will have an optional reference to the parent group which
will be empty for the root group.

Every `CompositePodGroup` object in the tree corresponds to the workload portion
that is contained in the subtree that has this `CompositePodGroup` object as its
root. Policies and constraints defined in the `CompositePodGroup` applies to
that workload portion.

`Workload` API, which continues to represent the static policy configuration of
a true workload, starts to contains the definition of templates for the
`CompositePodGroup` objects, similar to how it already did so for the `Podgroup`
objects. To clearly reflect the hierarchical nature of a workload, template
contains the definition of the children group templates.

For illustration, here is a diagram depicting a sample three-level group
hierarchy consisting of `CompositePodGroup` and `PodGroup` objects with the
references to the templates within the matching `Workload` object:

> ```mermaid

Reviewer 2: In the diagram below - why do you need CompositePodGroup `worker-0` and `worker-1`?

in my mental model, the CompositePodGroup makes sense, only if really has more than 1 child. If it has exactly 1 child - it can effectively be combined with its child.

Author: Adjusted the chart's structure.

        cpg1 -- "ParentRef" --> cpg
    end

    subgraph workload ["Workload templates"]
        direction TB
        cpgt0["CompositePodGroupTemplate: Root"]
        cpgt1["CompositePodGroupTemplate: Worker"]
        pgt["PodGroupTemplate: main"]

        cpgt0 --> cpgt1
        cpgt1 --> pgt
    end

    cpg -. "TemplateRef" .-> cpgt0
    cpg0 -. "TemplateRef" .-> cpgt1
    cpg1 -. "TemplateRef" .-> cpgt1
    ps0 -. "TemplateRef" .-> pgt
    ps1 -. "TemplateRef" .-> pgt
```

### Changes to the `Workload` API

`Workload` spec gets extended with a new field that contains template definitions
for the top-level `CompositePodGroup` objects. That field is a union member field and
the `PodGroupTemplates` becomes a part of that union:

```go
// WorkloadSpec defines the desired state of a Workload.
type WorkloadSpec struct {
	// ... existing fields ...

	// CompositePodGroupTemplates is the list of CompositePodGroup templates that make up the Workload.
	// The maximum number of templates is 8. This field is immutable.
	// This field is used only when the CompositePodGroup feature gate is enabled.
	//
	// +featureGate=CompositePodGroup
	// +optional
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=name

> 	CompositePodGroupTemplates []CompositePodGroupTemplate // <-- NEW FIELD

Reviewer 2: I would assume that exactly one of CompositePodGroupTemplates and PodGroupTemplates can be set, right?

Author: Yes - description above states that it is a union member, together with `PodGroupTemplates`. I should have added the DV tags to make it clearer.

That said, I see a peculiar issue with this approach - let's say that:
- User enables the `CompositePodGroup` feature gate,
- User creates a `Workload` with CPG templates (hence `PodGroupTemplates` is empty),
- User disables the `CompositePodGroup` feature gate,
- We end up with a broken `Workload` object that has empty `PodGroupTemplates` - and non-empty `CompositePodGroupTemplates` is not used either because the gate was disabled.

By "broken object" I mean an object that couldn't have been created when the `CompositePodGroup` was disabled because we would require non-nil `PodGroupTemplates` - and which doesn't make any sense in the world without the CPGs.

Reviewer 2: That's not a new pattern - API approvers definitely have answer to that, please ask Jordan.

Author: Discussed that with Jordan - this is apparently fine.

I also added relevant DV and OpenAPI tags to make that explicit when reading the snippet containing the API definition. Resolving.

	// It must be a DNS label. This field is immutable.
	//
	// +required
	Name string

	// ...
	// ... scheduling policy, disruption and constraints-related fields ...
	// ...

	// CompositePodGroupTemplates is the list of CompositePodGroup templates that make up the Workload.
	// The maximum number of templates is 8. This field is immutable.
	//
	// +optional
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=name
	CompositePodGroupTemplates []CompositePodGroupTemplate

	// PodGroupTemplates is the list of PodGroup templates that make up the Workload.
	// The maximum number of templates is 8. This field is immutable.
	//
	// +optional
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=name
	PodGroupTemplates []PodGroupTemplate
}
```

A couple of fields were omitted from the template definition for brevity and
clarity - we will discuss them in detail during deep dive into the
`CompositePodGroup` API because they have exactly the same structure and
semantics as the corresponding fields in `CompositePodGroupTemplate` and their
values are supposed to be copied from the template on `CompositePodGroup`
creation.

### Changes to the `PodGroup` API

> The only change to the `PodGroup` API is the addition of a new optional field

Reviewer 2: One more thing that I was briefly chatting with @mm4tt last week.

The discussion that we had originated in the problem that "standalone PodGroup are useful, but they become problematic for ensuring the right structure".

The thought from that discussion was that, we may actually decide the evolve that and say that:
"standalone PodGroup (one that is not referencing PodGroupTemplate) is actually allowed, only when it is *really standalone*"
In other words - standalone PodGroup cannot have a parent set.

That simplifies the potential validation and admission.

Author: Done.

	// SchedulingPolicy defines the scheduling policy for this instance of the CompositePodGroup.
	// Controllers are expected to fill this field by copying it from a CompositePodGroupTemplate.
	// This field is immutable.
	//
	// +required
	SchedulingPolicy CompositePodGroupSchedulingPolicy

	// SchedulingConstraints defines optional scheduling constraints (e.g. topology) for this
	// CompositePodGroup.
	// Controllers are expected to fill this field by copying it from a CompositePodGroupTemplate.
	// This field is immutable.
	// This field is only available when the TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling feature gate is enabled.
	//
	// +featureGate=TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling
	// +optional
	SchedulingConstraints *PodGroupSchedulingConstraints

	// DisruptionMode defines the mode in which a given CompositePodGroup can be disrupted.
	// Controllers are expected to fill this field by copying it from a CompositePodGroupTemplate.
	// One of Pod, PodGroup. Defaults to Pod if unset.
	// This field is immutable.
	// This field is available only when the WorkloadAwarePreemption feature gate
	// is enabled.
	//
	// +featureGate=WorkloadAwarePreemption
	// +optional
	// +default="Pod"

> 	DisruptionMode *CompositeDisruptionMode

Reviewer 2: I think we were talking about changing DisruptionMode to a struct so that we can later extend it with more information.
So it would effectively become a union of potential DisruptionModes.

@Argh4k - if we don't find good arguments against, we need to ensure that is also beta blocker for Workload-Aware-Preemption KEP.

Reviewer 6: Do I understand correctly that you want to have same struct for both disrutption mode of PodGroup and CompositePodGroup? Then I guess we also need to change the naming slightly because Pod and PodGroup does not seem to make sense in the context of CompositePodGroup. The Basic/Group that I can see further in the doc makes more sense for both I guess.

Reviewer 2: I'm not yet sure we want the same disruption mode or not.
For now I don't see a good to separate them, but I'm afraid we may find one in the future...

Author: Started discussion about renaming and restructuring in the comments in Dominik's PR that introduces v1alpha3 API: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/138572.

Author: Updated the KEP assuming the new structure of the disruption mode.

	// controller populates this field from PriorityClassName.
	// The higher the value, the higher the priority.
	// This field is immutable.
	// This field is available only when the WorkloadAwarePreemption feature gate
	// is enabled.
	//
	// +featureGate=WorkloadAwarePreemption
	// +optional
	Priority *int32
}
```

##### Template reference

```go
// CompositePodGroupTemplateReference references a CompositePodGroup template defined in some object (e.g. Workload).
// Exactly one reference must be set.
// +union
type CompositePodGroupTemplateReference struct {
	// Workload references the CompositePodGroupTemplate within the Workload object that was used to create
	// the CompositePodGroup.
	//
	// +optional
	Workload *WorkloadCompositePodGroupTemplateReference
}

// WorkloadCompositePodGroupTemplateReference references the CompositePodGroupTemplate within the Workload object.
type WorkloadCompositePodGroupTemplateReference struct {
	// WorkloadName defines the name of the Workload object.
	//
	// +required
	WorkloadName string

	// CompositePodGroupTemplateName defines the CompositePodGroupTemplate name within the Workload object.
	//
	// +required

> 	CompositePodGroupTemplateName string

Reviewer 2: That doesn't work for structures with more layers, I think.

So imagine a Workload that is:
```
myWorkload:
  - cpgTemplateLevel0:
    - cpgTemplatelevel1:
      -myPodGroup
```

Then CompositePodGroup can reference cpgTemplate0, but you no longer can create CPG that would reference cpgTemplate1 with that structure.

If the CPGTemplate is recursive, the reference also has to be recurisve, right?

Author: >If the CPGTemplate is recursive, the reference also has to be recurisve, right?

In practice, it doesn't have to - in the current vision, you'd basically need to walk through the referred Workload object's template hierarchy to find the referred template.

That said, your proposal sounds simpler and doesn't require running some kind of a DFS/BFS whenever one tries to get to the referred template.

We would need to additionally validate that the template reference is valid, though (i.e. the whole path in the reference actually exists in the `Workload` object).

Reviewer 2: > In practice, it doesn't have to - in the current vision, you'd basically need to walk through the referred Workload object's template hierarchy to find the referred template.

That would also require ensuring uniqueness of names in the whole tree - I'm not sure that's the best option.
I would rather try to reach uniqueness within a given node and then DFS/BFS won't help...

Author: Adjusted the proposed template hierarchy structure accordingly.

### Object ownership and garbage collection

TODO - describe finalizer-based garbage collection with the extension to the
PodGroup protection controller.

### Changes in `kube-scheduler`

#### Group gang scheduling

TODO - describe the changes required to handle group gang semantics:

- Scheduling queue changes
- `GangScheduling` plugin changes:
  - `PreEnqueue`
  - `Permit`
  - Queuing hints

#### Integration with workload-aware preemption

TODO - describe changes required to handle preemption of CompositePodGroups:

- `DefaultPreemption` plugin changes:
  - Adjusted victim computation
  - Adjusted victim scoring

#### Multi-level topology-aware scheduling

TODO - describe the greedy recursive algorithm.

### API validation

This section contains complicated conditions that kube-apiserver needs to check
when the new API is being used. Simple and obvious checks that can be easily
covered by the declarative validation already are left out on purpose here for
brevity's sake.

#### `Workload`

`Workload` object now contains a hierarchy of templates that could have a large
depth. While some workloads have convoluted hierarchy, we do not want to allow
infinitely large tree structures.

> TODO - propose something that would enforce an upper bound for the template

Reviewer 2: Let's say that for now we support at most 3 levels (CPG->CPG->PG).

Author: I'm leaning towards 4 levels (CPG->CPG->CPG->PG) at most at the moment - this way, we are able to support the DisaggregatedSet API from the very beginning.

WDYT?

Author: After offline discussion, sticking to 3 levels for now.

One of the most apparent gaps today is the lack of multi-level topology-aware
scheduling. AI workloads require significant amount of Pod-to-Pod communication,
so the network bandwidth translates into the workload execution time, hence
higher cost of running such workloads. The bandwidth between the Pods depends
on their placement inside the data center and is highly correlated to the
proximity of the machines they are running on. Today's data centers are
frequently organized in a hierarchical structure - for instance, machines are
grouped in a rack, racks are grouped in a block and so on. Machines from the
same rack are closer to each other than machines belonging to different racks.
Similarly, machines from the same block are closer to each other than machines
from different blocks. Right now, it is infeasible to express more than a single
level of topology constraints, however, which prevents the users from taking
advantage of the physical layout of a data center when their workload is being
scheduled.

In addition, current logic of gang scheduling does not distinguish between the
Pods within a single `PodGroup` object. This prevents the users from properly

> scheduling heterogeneous gangs as a hierarchical group gang because there is no

Reviewer 6: What do you mean by `hierarchical group gang` here? I guess that this is about supporting something like a single unit of LWS, where the heterogeneous gang is a Leader + X workers, and you cannot model this unit with current API (minCount is not enough because you need to guarantee that leader is running). But I do not understand why would we call that hierarchical group gang

Author: Dropped the "hierarchical" adjective and stuck to just the `group gang` wording - this is indeed unfortunate wording.

Now, by `group gang` we mean exactly the thing you specified, i.e. at least N groups (of Pods or, recursively, groups) can be scheduled as one large gang.

Does that make sense?

Reviewer 6: I still think that it does not do a good job explaining the LWS and similar cases. Firstly:

> current logic of gang scheduling does not distinguish between the Pods within a single `PodGroup` object

I mean technically it does, there is nothing preventing you from creating 2 different pods under the same PodGroup.

> This prevents the users from properly scheduling heterogeneous gangs as a wider group gang because there is no feasible way to express this intent at the moment.

Still at this point in the doc I am not sure what group gang means. But I know that you can schedule a heteregoneous gang using the current PodGroup API. 

I think that you could start by explaining that sometimes you need to have a gang that consists of different types of pods that needs to be grouped together and this is what you call group gang.

Author: PTAL now - I encapsulated the concept in a "multi-level gang scheduling" term that I introduce in the "Motivation" section that shines light on what this actually is.

Reviewer 6: Thanks, I reread the motivation section and I believe it does a much better job explaining the concepts used later in doc.

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP describes the shift in the workload-aware scheduling architecture that
is necessary to support more complex, hierarchical scheduling requirements of
modern high-performance distributed workloads. We focus on the API, framework
and the basic building blocks - handling really sophisticated multi-level
scheduling requirements can come as a follow-up.

To achieve this, the KEP builds on the `Workload` and `PodGroup` APIs from

> [KEP-4671] and [KEP-5832] and introduces a new core API called

Reviewer 3: NIT: KEP-5832 has been merged into KEP-4671

Author: Done.

`CompositePodGroup`. This API allows expressing multi-level topology
constraints, gang scheduling and preemption policies for heterogeneous groups of
Pods and facilitates extending the Kubernetes scheduler with more policies in
the future.

## Motivation

Kubernetes 1.36 has made great strides in direction of evolving the process of
scheduling from a Pod-centric approach towards a workload-centric one. Thanks to
these efforts, we are now able to provide simple forms of gang scheduling and
gang preemption policies using the `PodGroup` API introduced in [KEP-5832]. This
release also added support for single-level topology-aware scheduling using the
Node labels-based topology constraints baked into the `PodGroup` and `Workload`
APIs ([KEP-5732]).

These features already cover the use cases of some simple batch workloads that

> are characterized by a flat homogeneous structure. [KEP-5547] is an example of a

Reviewer 3: I would argue whether homogeneous vs. heterogeneous is the key discriminator here. I would say that we are doing CompositePodGroup regardless of whether a PodGroup should be homogeneous or not.

LWS is a great example: I believe we can keep PodGroup heterogeneous for now (leader + worker), but hierarchy independently brings significant value by unlocking disaggregated inference.

Author: Reworded the section.

successful integration of the new APIs with the Job controller for a fully
parallel static indexed Job. That said, many modern distributed workloads,
especially the AI ones, contain some inherent hierarchy that often translates
into more complex scheduling needs that core Kubernetes cannot satisfy just yet.

> One of the most apparent gaps today is the lack of multi-level topology-aware

Reviewer 3: I guess this is already explained in the TAS KEP, so I would just link to that and explain the key benefits of multi-level TAS.

Overall, this KEP is already 1200 lines long, so I'd recommend cutting content wherever possible.

Author: Reworded that section substantially, though multi-level TAS is probably the main reason why the new API is needed, so I'd actually prefer to make this clear and explicit in the paragraph about the proposal's motivation.

preemption of a group gang or a preemption of a single group within a group
gang.

All of these gaps come from the fact that current scheduling APIs do not allow
expressing any kind of multi-level hierarchy that many out-of-tree Kubernetes
APIs are often characterized with. `JobSet`[^1] and `LeaderWorkerSet`[^2] are
probably the most popular instances of a higher-order API where such hierarchy
and homogeneity exists which bring about matching scheduling requirements like
the ones mentioned above. To close these gaps, we need to extend the
foundational scheduling APIs in a way that the true workload controllers can
express their multi-level scheduling requirements that kube-scheduler could
understand and act upon accordingly.

### Goals

- Define a new API that facilitates describing the hierarchy of a workload.
- Extend scheduling capabilities to support hierarchical scheduling
  requirements, including:
  - Gang scheduling and preemption policies with a group gang semantics.
  - Multi-level topology scheduling constraints.
- Ensure future extensibility of the API with new scheduling and disruption
  policies.

### Non-Goals

> - Extend topology-aware scheduling with the notion of preferred constraints.

Reviewer 3: @44past4, don't we want to do that in 1.37 (as a part of TAS KEP)?

Reviewer 2: not in 1.37 - let's not couple this together

Reviewer 5: DRA and resourceClaim integration is also part of TAS workstream ?

Author: DRA support is treated as out of this KEP's scope.

Author: Stated this explicitly in the non-goals section.

- Define the way how to express multi-level scheduling requirements in true
  workload APIs.
  - This will be addressed in a KEP spawned from a discussion in
    [API Design for WAS Controller Integration](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VG7Zto9JYuPG4Anb01WMRryJlfV6met0jgob3T2NjZ4/edit?usp=sharing).

## Proposal

The proposal introduces a design of a new API called `CompositePodGroup` and
describes which scheduling requirements of hierarchical workloads it solves and
in what way. The design outlines the API shape, its lifecycle and validation and
the way how true workload controllers can integrate with it. We also discuss
adjustments inside the kube-scheduler that are needed to support scheduling
requirements expressed through this API.

This proposal builds and depends heavily on the enhancements that have been
recently introduced in the workload-aware scheduling space. We assume that the
reader is already acquainted with the following KEPs:

- [KEP-4671: Gang Scheduling using Workload Object](https://kep.k8s.io/4671)
- [KEP-5710: Workload-aware preemption](https://kep.k8s.io/5710)
- [KEP-5732: Topology-aware workload scheduling](https://kep.k8s.io/5732)

> - [KEP-5832: Decouple PodGroup API](https://kep.k8s.io/5832)

Reviewer 3: Again, this one is gone.

Author: Done.

Rather than revolutionize the core concepts that these KEPs introduced, the
proposal generalizes them and leaves the door open for further extensions.

### Backward compatibility

For flat homogeneous workloads, using the `CompositePodGroup` API is not needed.
True workload controllers can continue using the `PodGroup` and `Workload` APIs
exclusively the way they used to - this consumption pattern will continue to be

> supported.

Reviewer 5: I think, as @mm4tt mentioned about `CompisitePodGroup` is useful for homogeneous workloads too.

> ### User Stories

Reviewer 5: What do we think about use-case when TrainJob consists of multiple stages for post-training (e.g. initializer, Trainer, Evaluator).
CompositePodGroups might be useful there as well: https://github.com/andreyvelich/trainer/blob/3833e9575d698c371cf7288af1d6eb941972de50/docs/proposals/3015-workload-aware-scheduling/README.md#story-3

Also, for hyperparameter optimization jobs we usually have multiple Trials (e.g. TrainJobs) that suggestion service evaluate over time to find the best combination.

Reviewer 3: I agree that these are reasonable user stories. The existing examples in this PR focus heavily on multi-level topology, but this proposal also unblocks critical user stories for hierarchical workloads, such as:

LeaderWorkerSet (LWS): A set of gangs utilizing single-level topology-aware scheduling.

JobSet: Gang-of-gangs scheduling semantics.

TrainJob: Complex dependencies across multi-stage replicated jobs. For instance, initializers can rely on a basic scheduling policy, while the actual Trainer (MPI Launcher + Workers) requires strict gang scheduling.

I recommend incorporating some of these examples into the KEP to better illustrate the broader applicability of the API.

Reviewer 3: Done.

	//
	// +featureGate=CompositePodGroup
	// +optional
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=name
	CompositePodGroupTemplates []CompositePodGroupTemplate // <-- NEW FIELD
}
```

Similarly to `PodGroupTemplate`, the `CompositePodGroupTemplate` data structure
contains all the information necessary to stamp out a corresponding
`CompositePodGroup` object. In addition, `CompositePodGroupTemplate` contains
template definitions for the children groups - which are either
`CompositePodGroup` or `PodGroup` objects:

```go
// CompositePodGroupTemplate represents a template for a CompositePodGroup with a scheduling policy.
type CompositePodGroupTemplate struct {
	// Name is a unique identifier for the CompositePodGroupTemplate within the Workload.
	// It must be a DNS label. This field is immutable.
	//
	// +required
	Name string

	// ...
	// ... scheduling policy, disruption and constraints-related fields ...
	// ...

	// CompositePodGroupTemplates is the list of CompositePodGroup templates that make up the Workload.
	// The maximum number of templates is 8. This field is immutable.
	//
	// +optional
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=name

> 	CompositePodGroupTemplates []CompositePodGroupTemplate

Reviewer 7: Just to confirm, is the recursive reference in `CompositePodGroupTemplate` intentional? It seem to allow nesting templates inside themselves.

Reviewer 2: Yes - it's intentional.

Reviewer 5: Do we need to validate levels of recursion here?

Reviewer 7: Wouldn’t this recursive definition fail OpenAPI schema validation?

Author: >Do we need to validate levels of recursion here?

Yes - this will be validated, we cover this in the "API validation" section in the KEP.

>Wouldn’t this recursive definition fail OpenAPI schema validation?

As long as the recursive field is marked as optional, there shouldn't be any problem with that. I did some POC of the CPG API in the past and everything seemed to have worked there.

There is even some prior art of introducing recursive structures in the Kubernetes API already: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-auth/5681-conditional-authorization.

creation.

### Changes to the `PodGroup` API

The only change to the `PodGroup` API is the addition of a new optional field
that denotes the parent `CompositePodGroup` object.

```go
// PodGroupSpec defines the desired state of a PodGroup.
type PodGroupSpec struct {
	// ... existing fields ...

	// ParentRef references the parent composite pod group of this pod group.
	// If it's nil, then this pod group is a root of a workload's hierarchy.
	// This field is used only when the CompositePodGroup feature gate is enabled.
	// This field is immutable.
	//
	// +featureGate=CompositePodGroup
	// +optional
	ParentRef *ParentReference // <-- NEW FIELD
}
```

`ParentReference` contains the name of the parent `CompositePodGroup` within the
same namespace. Same data structure is used in the `CompositePodGroup` spec to
denote the parent group.

```go
// ParentReference references the parent object of a PodGroup or a
// CompositePodGroup in the same namespace. In every case, the parent object is
// a CompositePodGroup.
type ParentReference struct {
	// CompositePodGroupName specifies the name of the parent CompositePodGroup.
	//
	// +required
	CompositePodGroupName string

> }

Reviewer 5: Do we keep this struct for future extension, if we want to allow cross-namespace references?

I am curious why not just this:
```go
type PodGroupSpec struct {
   // name for CompositePodGroupName
	ParentRef string 
}
```

Author: Hmm, I don't think we actually have an example of a multi-namespace true workload, do we?

Wrt. having just a string field instead of a dedicated type - good question, I thought about having a struct instead because it would be easier to extend in the future (which is difficult to predict:)).

Reviewer 5: Not right now, workloads are namespace-scoped.

Author: Actually, when I thought about it for a bit longer, I prefer your idea more given it simplifies the API structure which is already pretty complex.

Evolved the `ParentRef` from a dedicated struct to a string named `ParentCompositePodGroupName`.

	//
	// +optional
	metav1.ObjectMeta

	// Spec defines the desired state of the CompositePodGroup.
	//
	// +required
	Spec CompositePodGroupSpec

	// Status represents the current observed state of the CompositePodGroup.
	//
	// +optional
	Status CompositePodGroupStatus
}
```

#### Spec

TODO

```go
type CompositePodGroupSpec struct {
	// ParentRef references the parent composite pod group of this composite pod group.
	// If it's nil, then this composite pod group is a root of a workload's hierarchy.
	// This field is immutable.
	//
	// +optional
	ParentRef *ParentReference

	// CompositePodGroupTemplateRef references a CompositePodGroup template within other object
	// (e.g. Workload) that was used to create the CompositePodGroup.
	// This field is immutable.
	//
	// +required
	CompositePodGroupTemplateRef *CompositePodGroupTemplateReference

	// SchedulingPolicy defines the scheduling policy for this instance of the CompositePodGroup.
	// Controllers are expected to fill this field by copying it from a CompositePodGroupTemplate.
	// This field is immutable.
	//
	// +required

> 	SchedulingPolicy CompositePodGroupSchedulingPolicy

Reviewer 5: If PodGroup has ParentRef to the Composition, does it have the same spec values as defined in CompositePodGroupSpec (e.g. minCount)?

Author: I'm not sure if I follow - CompositePodGroup (CPG) can have a different scheduling policy that its children PodGroups (PGs) - e.g.  basic policy for CPG and gang policy for all children PGs.

Reviewer 5: I’m trying to understand why fields like `SchedulingConstraints, DisruptionMode, PriorityClassName, and Priority` are needed in the CompositePodGroup spec?
Shouldn’t these values instead be defined directly on the leaf PodGroups?

Also, regarding MinGroupCount: how do we determine which groups should be scheduled first when only a subset is required?

Do we expect a real use case where users want to schedule only a sub-gang of groups within a CompositePodGroup?

Author: PTAL at the refreshed motivation section in the KEP - it contains a high level intuition why we need the CPG spec to contain these fields.

We need scheduling constraints on different levels of a group hierarchy in order to support multi-level TAS in kube-scheduler. I don't see how to conveniently represent those multi-level constraints if they were put in the leaf groups (i.e. PodGroups) exclusively. I would also argue that the model proposed in the KEP is actually more transparent and clearly matches the hierarchy of constraints thanks to having different topological constraints on different levels. 

With respect to WAP-specific fields:
- having disruption mode settable in the CPG spec allows you to express the gang-of-gangs requirement as well as being able to tolerate partial preemptions (e.g. LWS that is fine with preempting a single leader-workers replica).
- having priority for CPG is important to rate the importance of potential victims when preemption has to be run to fit some workload; in theory, you could model the priority of a CPG as e.g. a maximum of priorities of PGs that this CPG consists of but it makes the priority of the CPG dynamic and hard to track over time. kube-scheduler also needs the priority of the root CPG to know when it can be popped from the scheduling queue.

>Also, regarding MinGroupCount: how do we determine which groups should be scheduled first when only a subset is required?

I'm yet to describe this in the KEP and have an explicit TODO for that, stay tuned:)

Reviewer 5: I see, that makes sense.

For TopologyConstraint, the scheduler resolves constraints top-down through the hierarchy.

Zone constraint at root CPG ensures all children land in the same zone, rack constraint at child CPG ensures its PGs land on the same rack, and node-level constraint at PG ensures pods are colocated on the same machine.
So one of the Pods which belong to root CGP will land to Node with the labels:
```
topology.kubernetes.io/zone: zone-1
topology.kubernetes.io/rack: rack-1
topology.kubernetes.io/machine: vm-1
```
 Is that the correct understanding?

---

For `DisruptionMode`, shall we validate:
If root `DisruptionMode == Group`, then all direct child CPGs and PGs must also have `DisruptionMode == Group`.

If a parent CPG has `Group` mode and a child CPG/PG has Basic mode, the child's Basic mode is effectively dead letter

Author: >Is that the correct understanding?

Yes - I expanded the section discussing the constraints-related field in the discussion about the CPG API to make it clearer.

Regarding `DisruptionMode` - I'm not sure just yet. Validating that on the `Workload` level would be easy, though it would be infeasible to validate this on a cross-group structure.

Right now, I'm leaning towards the "dead letter" semantics - but I agree we need to make some decision and document it in the KEP. I left an explicit TODO for that in the KEP for the time being.

Reviewer 3: I agree. I documented the supported rules for multi-level disruption modes in the KEP:
- CPG with `DisruptionMode=Single` can have children with `DisruptionMode=Single` or `All`
- CPG with `DisruptionMode=All` can only have children with `DisruptionMode=All`

We definitely need runtime validation, but we likely won't have it in alpha. It's currently listed under the beta graduation criteria.

	// SchedulingConstraints defines optional scheduling constraints (e.g. topology) for this
	// CompositePodGroup.
	// Controllers are expected to fill this field by copying it from a CompositePodGroupTemplate.
	// This field is immutable.
	// This field is only available when the TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling feature gate is enabled.
	//
	// +featureGate=TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling
	// +optional
	SchedulingConstraints *PodGroupSchedulingConstraints

	// DisruptionMode defines the mode in which a given CompositePodGroup can be disrupted.
	// Controllers are expected to fill this field by copying it from a CompositePodGroupTemplate.

> 	// One of Pod, PodGroup. Defaults to Pod if unset.

Reviewer 6: Here you have `One of Pod, PodGroup. Defaults to Pod if unset.` but in the `type CompositeDisruptionMode string` you have Basic/Group.

Reviewer 2: We need better names in general for both I think :)

Maybe Single/All is better (and then we can actually be consistent)?
@mm4tt - thoughts?

Author: Either Single/All or Any/All are fine by me.

Suggested this renaming in Dominik's PR with the v1alpha3 API introduction: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/138572#discussion_r3218751888.

Author: Updated the KEP assuming the new structure of the disruption mode, including new naming.

- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

- 2026-04: Initial KEP-6012 proposal.

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

## Alternatives

### API shape

Numerous discussions took place within the community about the API and how it
should evolve in the future to support hierarchical workloads. Some of them were
driven in documents linked below[^4][^5][^6]. WAS Design Summit[^7], which took
place right before the KubeCon Europe 2026, has helped reach the consensus
regarding the design - this proposal is essentially a realization of the design
that was agreed on during the summit.

For completeness, we distill the main ideas considered previously in those
discussions below and provide rationale why they were eventually abandoned.

#### `PodGroup` as a recursive API type

Instead of introducing another API, one possible alternative way to model
hierarchical workloads would be to evolve the `PodGroup` API into a recursive
type itself.

> The drawback of this approach is that `Pod`-oriented policies would stop making

Reviewer 8: Can you give some examples of the policies that would not make sense? I think we need to lay down the reasons more precisely to justify duplicating the PodGroup structure and its function.

It´s pretty obvious that Pods and PodGroups need different defintions (as the latter need to specify how to schedule a group of objects), but it´s not that obvious that their types matter.

I could come up with the following SchedulingPolicies that are actually abstract from the object types they schedule: 
- BasicSchedulingPolicy
- GangSchedulingPolicy
- AnyOfSchedulingPolicy
- PrioritizedAlternativesSchedulingPolicy

The claim in this KEP is that we may have a SchedulingPolicy which effectively determines the type of objects that can refer to it, for instance HomogeneousSchedulingPolicy. Even here I could imagine we have a policy which can remain absract if we allow to specify anyOf{PodTemplate, PodGroupTemplate}.

What´s even more important, I´d challenge whether PodGroup is the right type to model a group of non-existing-yet objects. Maybe we should think about a dedicated type to represent them instead? I feel that they would have completely different scheduling semantics, which is not fully envisioned yet, as we most likely will need to have some sort of reservations.

I have one more argument. Let´s imagine that we have a new leaf type that is for instance SlurmNode. It could be one of the ways we abstract resource reservation to avoid (ab)using Pods for it. We could still group those objects into exactly the same type of groups and use the same set of SchedulingPolicies as building blocks allowing to express exactly same structures as we need for pods. This is why I was not even a fan of baking the ¨Pod¨ name into ¨PodGroup¨.

Reviewer 2: I think the argument described in the text is not the primary one. The whole point is not that these can have different policies. It all boils down to the fact that they represent fundamentally different concepts.

The first one (PodGroup) represents a group of pods that we should treat as a single entity.
The second one (CompositePodGroup) no longer represents a group of pods - it represents a complex structure of potentially nested groups.
Even if from the scheduling perspective we may handle them the same way, these are fundamentally different concepts.

Let me try to draw an analogy.

Let's consider "an apartment".  An apartment allows to group people that live together. Those may form a family (gang), be students just sharing it (basic), it can be used for short-term rental (at most one group at a time) or whatever else. But it's a unit of living - it has exactly one front door - if you have access to it, you have access to all its member. You just form a single group.

Now consider a "group of apartments". There can be different "layers" of that grouping. It may be "a floor" (apartments collocated on the same floor), it may be "a apartments with a common staircase" it may be the "whole building". Or different kind of groupings.
In the end, they underneath still group people (all people from the same floor, etc.). But it's a different kind of grouping - you can't arbitrarily shuffle between apartments. This represent different level of grouping (even if that's still a grouping).
We may argue that "floor" is different than "building" - it is, but the semantics are somewhat similar.

The grouping of the lowest-level primitive (people in the analogy, pods in this KEP) is just a different concept than a group of some more complex structures.
So even if we can collapse it in certain cases to a common abstraction (which we will probably do in the scheduling algorithm), doesn't mean that we should model them with the same abstraction in the API level.

Author: Thanks Wojtek - I revamped the rationale stated in the KEP to emphasize the qualitative difference (without copying the charming analogy:)).

```go
// PodGroupSpec defines the desired state of a PodGroup.
type PodGroupSpec struct {
	// ... existing fields ...

	// TemplateRef references an optional PodGroup template within other object
	// (e.g. Workload) that was used to create the PodGroup. This field is immutable.
	//
	// +optional
	TemplateRef *TemplateReference

	// ParentRef references the parent composite pod group of this pod group.
	// If it's nil, then this pod group is a root of a workload's hierarchy.
	// This field is used only when the CompositePodGroup feature gate is enabled.
	// This field is immutable.
	//
	// +optional
	// +featureGate=CompositePodGroup
	ParentRef *ParentReference // <-- NEW FIELD
}
```

#### `TemplateReference`

`TemplateReference` contains information about the referred `Workload` and the
reference to the template definition embedded in that `Workload` object that was
used to create that particular `PodGroup`.

```go
// TemplateReference TODO.
// Exactly one reference must be set.
// +union
type TemplateReference struct {
	// Workload references the Workload object that was used to create a particular
	// PodGroup or CompositePodGroup.
	//
	// +optional
	Workload *WorkloadReference

> }

Reviewer 7: What’s the added value of adding the `TemplateReference` struct? Is it expected to be extended in the future?

Author: I simplified the structure a bit. The reason for having a `TemplateReference` struct is that it will be easier to extend the possible set of places where one defines a template for a group, not just in the Workload API. This is a small risk but we want to mitigate it through this additional layer.

	// Controllers are expected to fill this field by copying it from a CompositePodGroupTemplate.
	// This field is immutable.
	// This field is only available when the TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling feature gate is enabled.
	//
	// +featureGate=TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling
	// +optional
	// +k8s:ifDisabled(TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling)=+k8s:forbidden
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling)=+k8s:optional
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling)=+k8s:immutable
	SchedulingConstraints *CompositePodGroupSchedulingConstraints

	// DisruptionMode defines the mode in which a given CompositePodGroup can be disrupted.
	// Controllers are expected to fill this field by copying it from a CompositePodGroupTemplate.
	// One of Single, All. Defaults to Single if unset. This field is immutable.
	//
	// This field is available only when the WorkloadAwarePreemption feature gate
	// is enabled.
	//
	// +featureGate=WorkloadAwarePreemption
	// +optional
	// +k8s:ifDisabled("WorkloadAwarePreemption")=+k8s:forbidden
	// +k8s:ifEnabled("WorkloadAwarePreemption")=+k8s:optional
	// +k8s:ifEnabled("WorkloadAwarePreemption")=+k8s:immutable
	// +default={"single": {}}

> 	DisruptionMode *CompositeDisruptionMode

Reviewer 9: When _WorkloadAwarePreemption_ enabled, we won't do field wiping, so the default value `{"single": {}}` would always be carried over if it is unset.
~So it looks like we don't need this `k8s:optional` when featuregate enabled?~

Internally for DeclarativeValidation, we emit a "requiredness" check for a `k8s:optional+default` combo.
```
	// A field which is marked as optional but has a default is optional to
	// clients, but required to the server. A client is allowed to not set it
	// but the server will give it a default value. Code which consumes it can
	// assume that it always has a value.
```

Reviewer 9: I take this back. The current tags should be ok. Just need to keep in mind that `+k8s:optional` with `+default` would be evaluated as "required", so don't be surprise when writing test case for this validation.

allows expressing multi-level topology constraints, gang scheduling and
preemption policies for heterogeneous groups of Pods and facilitates extending
the Kubernetes scheduler with more policies in the future.

## Motivation

Kubernetes 1.36 has made great strides in direction of evolving the process of
scheduling from a Pod-centric approach towards a workload-centric one. Thanks to
these efforts, we are now able to provide simple forms of gang scheduling and
gang preemption policies using the `PodGroup` API introduced in [KEP-4671]. This
release also added support for single-level topology-aware scheduling using the
Node labels-based topology constraints baked into the `PodGroup` and `Workload`
APIs ([KEP-5732]). These features already cover the use cases of simple batch
workloads that are characterized by a flat structure. [KEP-5547] is an example
of a successful integration of the new APIs with the Job controller for a fully
parallel static indexed Job.

Many modern distributed workloads (especially the AI ones) have scheduling
requirements that cannot be satisfied using the API abstractions available
today, however. Multi-level topology-aware scheduling is the most apparent

> feature gap in Kubernetes today that such workloads strongly demand. Multi-level

Reviewer 3: While multi-level topology is an important capability, if we think about it, it is not the dominant user need. The primary feature gap is actually the ability to model complex, heterogeneous workloads composed of distinct sub-groups with varied dependencies.

Notice that one of the key driving use cases for CPG is disaggregated inference. In reality, it relies on a single-level topology (prefill and decode sharing the same high-bandwitdh network domain) but requires multi-level structure to express additional dependencies like:
1. There should be a least N Ps and M Ds
2. Components like frontends don't need TAS at all but are critical to the workload lifecycle so should be preempted together with P+D

Reviewer 2: I would argue that it depends on the point-of-view.
TPU is an example of multi-layer architecture where without multi-level structure you can't express your topological constraint. So without multi-level structure you won't be able to achieve the desired performance (so in fact efficiently use TPUs at all).

I agree with you it's not the only - but I wouldn't also say that some is dominating.

topology constraints form a hierarchy which often correspond to the physical
layout of a data center they are being run in. This hierarchy can be mentally
represented as a rooted tree where each node corresponds to a specific slice of

> a workload and constains topological constraints that must be respected when it

Reviewer 3: contains

Author: Fixed.

is being scheduled.

These workloads often have to be scheduled as a single multi-level gang. Each

> level might additionally require that a slice of a workload cannot be scheduled

Reviewer 3: I suggest avoiding new terminology like "slice" and "subslice" here to minimize cognitive load. Since we already model the workload as a tree and defined concept of (pod)group, we can explain multi-level gang scheduling directly through parent groups and child sub-groups.

Rephrasing suggestion:

```
These workloads often require multi-level gang scheduling. In this model, a parent group dictates that it cannot be scheduled until a specified minimum number of its child sub-groups are schedulable. Essentially, this extends traditional gang scheduling by treating entire sub-groups, rather than individual Pods, as members of a gang.
```

Reviewer 2: +1

Author: Thanks for the rephrasing suggestion, I think it sounds much clearer now:) applied the rewording.

scheduling APIs in a way that the true workload controllers can express their
multi-level scheduling requirements that kube-scheduler could understand and act
upon accordingly.

### Goals

- Define a new API that facilitates describing the hierarchy of a workload.
- Extend scheduling capabilities to support hierarchical scheduling
  requirements, including:
  - Multi-level gang scheduling.
  - Multi-level preemption policies
  - Multi-level topology scheduling constraints.
- Ensure future extensibility of the API with new scheduling and disruption
  policies.

### Non-Goals

- Extend topology-aware scheduling with the notion of preferred constraints.
- Define the way how to express multi-level scheduling requirements in true
  workload APIs.
  - This will be addressed in a KEP spawned from a discussion in
    [API Design for WAS Controller Integration](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VG7Zto9JYuPG4Anb01WMRryJlfV6met0jgob3T2NjZ4/edit?usp=sharing).
- Add support for associating ResourceClaims with instances of the new API.
  - We will continue supporting sharing ResourceClaims among Pods within an
  individual `PodGroup`, however.

> 

Reviewer 3: I'd consider adding a point here about guaranteeing the optimality of multi-level scheduling algorithms. We should explicitly note that since single-level PodGroup scheduling for heterogeneous Pods is already an NP-hard problem, multi-level hierarchies further increase this complexity. While we aim to design efficient heuristics, guaranteeing an optimal placement is out of scope.

Reviewer 2: +1 - this reflects my comment here:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6017/changes#r3202133849

We should be very specific that we will never really solve it (though I'm all for adding beta criteria to figure out what additional heuristrics we may want to consider).

Author: Fully agreed - added.

            ChildCPG2 <--> PG3
            ChildCPG2 <--> PG4
        end

        RootCPG <--> ChildCPG1
        RootCPG <--> ChildCPG2
    end

    subgraph Templates ["<b>Workload templates</b>"]
        RootCPGT["CompositePodGroupTemplate: Root"]
        ChildCPGT["CompositePodGroupTemplate: Replica"]
        PGT1["PodGroupTemplate:</br>Workers"]
        PGT2["PodGroupTemplate:</br>Driver"]

        RootCPGT --> ChildCPGT
        ChildCPGT --> PGT1
        ChildCPGT --> PGT2
    end

    RootCPG -. "TemplateRef" .-> RootCPGT

    ChildCPG1 -. "TemplateRef" .-> ChildCPGT
    ChildCPG2 -. "TemplateRef" .-> ChildCPGT

    PG1 -. "TemplateRef" .-> PGT1
    PG2 -. "TemplateRef" .-> PGT2
    PG3 -. "TemplateRef" .-> PGT1
    PG4 -. "TemplateRef" .-> PGT2

    classDef composite stroke-width:2px;
    classDef podgroup stroke-width:1px;
    classDef template stroke-width:1px,stroke-dasharray: 5 5;
    
    classDef hiddenBranch fill:none,stroke:none;

    class RootCPG,ChildCPG1,ChildCPG2 composite;
    class PG1,PG2,PG3,PG4 podgroup;
    class RootCPGT,ChildCPGT,PGT1,PGT2 template;
    class Branch1,Branch2 hiddenBranch;
```

### Changes to the `Workload` API

> 

Reviewer 3: Have we considered the trade-offs of alternative top-level template structures in the Workload spec?

Single CompositePodGroupTemplate instead of a slice: This strictly enforces a single tree hierarchy per workload rather than a forest of CPGs (while preserving flat PodGroup forests for backward compatibility).

Dropping the union constraint: Allowing both fields simultaneously would enable modeling mixed forests where top-level roots can be either CPGs or standalone leaf PGs.

Let's briefly document the rationale for settling on the current design.

Reviewer 2: > Dropping the union constraint: Allowing both fields simultaneously would enable modeling mixed forests where top-level roots can be either CPGs or standalone leaf PGs.

Mixed models always add additional confusion - I would like to avoid that.

	//
	// This field is used only when the CompositePodGroup feature gate is enabled.
	//
	// +featureGate=CompositePodGroup
	// +optional
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=name
	// +k8s:ifDisabled("CompositePodGroup")=+k8s:forbidden
	// +k8s:ifEnabled("CompositePodGroup")=+k8s:optional
	// +k8s:ifEnabled("CompositePodGroup")=+k8s:unionMember
	// +k8s:ifEnabled("CompositePodGroup")=+k8s:listType=map
	// +k8s:ifEnabled("CompositePodGroup")=+k8s:listMapKey=name
	// +k8s:ifEnabled("CompositePodGroup")=+k8s:maxItems=8
	// +k8s:ifEnabled("CompositePodGroup")=+k8s:immutable
	CompositePodGroupTemplates []CompositePodGroupTemplate
}
```

Similarly to `PodGroupTemplate`, the `CompositePodGroupTemplate` data structure
contains all the information necessary to construct a corresponding
`CompositePodGroup` object. In addition, `CompositePodGroupTemplate` contains
template definitions for the children groups - which can be either
`CompositePodGroup` or `PodGroup` objects:

```go
// CompositePodGroupTemplate represents a template for a CompositePodGroup with a scheduling policy.
type CompositePodGroupTemplate struct {

> 	// Name is a unique identifier for the CompositePodGroupTemplate within the Workload.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't it be unique not only across CPGTs but across both CPGTs and PGTs?
This will make referncing simpler imho. Especially that we're reusing TemplateReference struct across both PGT and CPGT.

[Also while the text is technically correct, I'm not sure it will be clear to everyone that it's uniqueness across all layers of the workload]

Reviewer 3: There is a section about having validation for that.

Reviewer 2: Right - but my point was also to ensure that the comments in the API are cristal clear for the readers which I'm not convinced is the case now.

  within that `Workload` object.
- New field called `ParentCompositePodGroupName` is added which denotes a name
  of an optional parent `CompositePodGroup` object.

```go
// PodGroupSpec defines the desired state of a PodGroup.
type PodGroupSpec struct {
	// ... existing fields ...

	// TemplateRef references an optional PodGroup template within other object
	// (e.g. Workload) that was used to create the PodGroup.
	// This field is immutable.
	//
	// +optional
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:immutable
	TemplateRef *TemplateReference

	// ParentCompositePodGroupName contains the name of the parent composite pod group
	// within the same namespace as this pod group.
	// If it's nil, then this pod group is a root of a workload's hierarchy.
	// This field is used only when the CompositePodGroup feature gate is enabled.
	// This field is immutable.
	//
	// +featureGate=CompositePodGroup
	// +optional
	// +k8s:ifDisabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:forbidden
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:optional
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:immutable
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:format=k8s-long-name

> 	ParentCompositePodGroupName *string

Reviewer 3: @liggitt, from the API review perspective, any thoughts on this being `...Name *string` vs `...Ref *CompositePodGroupReference` ?

Author: Last time we discussed this offline, we aligned on the `Name` - not an API reviewer here but `...Ref` would suggest some struct that has more information than just the name - which is basically the only bit of information we're interested in here.

Reviewer 10: we don't use a Ref suffix when we use a bare string field pointing at the name of another API object. These are the only in-tree examples I can find and none of them are referring to other API objects:

```
staging/src/k8s.io/api/admissionregistration/v1/types.go:	FieldRef string `json:"fieldRef" protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=fieldRef"`
staging/src/k8s.io/api/admissionregistration/v1alpha1/types.go:	FieldRef string `json:"fieldRef" protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=fieldRef"`
staging/src/k8s.io/api/admissionregistration/v1beta1/types.go:	FieldRef string `json:"fieldRef" protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=fieldRef"`
staging/src/k8s.io/api/core/v1/types.go:	ImageRef string `json:"imageRef,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=imageRef"`
staging/src/k8s.io/kubelet/config/v1alpha1/types.go:	ImageRef string `json:"imageRef"`
staging/src/k8s.io/kubelet/config/v1beta1/types.go:	ImageRef string `json:"imageRef"`
```

I'd stick with Name

}
```

#### `TemplateReference`

`TemplateReference` contains information about the referred `Workload` and the
reference to the template definition embedded in that `Workload` object that was
used to create that particular `PodGroup`.

```go
// TemplateReference TODO.
// Exactly one field must be set.
// +union

> type TemplateReference struct {

Reviewer 3: This is probably the last moment to decide on the shape of this. I'd actually go back a step and ask again whether we really believe we'll have something other than Workload here in the foreseeable future? What problem would it address / why would we need that? 

@wojtek-t

Reviewer 2: I don't have any other usecase on my mind, but I can't predict the future.
I think the cost of this additional layer is relatively small so I would leave it personally.

But I would personally rely on @liggitt opinion from API perspective.

Author: Discussed that offline with Jordan and we're aligned towards flattening the API structure.

Refreshed the API structure in the KEP to reflect that.

type WorkloadReference struct {
	// WorkloadName is the name of the Workload object that contains a template
	// that was used when creating a pod group or a composite pod group. It must
	// be a DNS name.
	// This field is immutable.
	// This field is required.
	//
	// +required
	// +k8s:required
	// +k8s:immutable
	// +k8s:format=k8s-long-name
	WorkloadName string

	// TemplateName is the name of a template within the Workload object that
	// was used to create a pod group or a composite pod group. It must be a DNS label.
	// This field is immutable.
	// This field is required.
	//
	// +required
	// +k8s:required
	// +k8s:immutable
	// +k8s:format=k8s-short-name
	TemplateName string
}
```

#### Standalone `PodGroup` objects

In [KEP-4671], we introduced the notion of standalone `PodGroups` which are
`PodGroup` objects that can be created without a matching `Workload` object and
their template reference is hence nil.

This proposal wants to preserve this possibility but limit the use of it to the
flat workloads exclusively. In other words, `PodGroup` objects with a non-nil
parent reference must have a template reference.

> Because this check cannot be verified today with the use of declarative

Reviewer 2: @jpbetz - if you could help with making this happen :)

Author: CC @yongruilin with whom I discussed this offline already.

Author: This is already happening in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/139164 :)

	// +optional
	// +k8s:ifDisabled(TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling)=+k8s:forbidden
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling)=+k8s:optional
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling)=+k8s:immutable
	SchedulingConstraints *CompositePodGroupSchedulingConstraints

	// DisruptionMode defines the mode in which a given CompositePodGroup can be disrupted.
	// Controllers are expected to fill this field by copying it from a CompositePodGroupTemplate.
	// One of Single, All. Defaults to Single if unset. This field is immutable.
	//
	// This field is available only when the WorkloadAwarePreemption feature gate
	// is enabled.
	//
	// +featureGate=WorkloadAwarePreemption
	// +optional
	// +k8s:ifDisabled("WorkloadAwarePreemption")=+k8s:forbidden
	// +k8s:ifEnabled("WorkloadAwarePreemption")=+k8s:optional
	// +k8s:ifEnabled("WorkloadAwarePreemption")=+k8s:immutable
	// +default={"single": {}}
	DisruptionMode *CompositeDisruptionMode

	// PriorityClassName defines the priority that should be considered when scheduling this CompositePodGroup.
	// Controllers are expected to fill this field by copying it from a CompositePodGroupTemplate.

> 	// Otherwise, it is validated and resolved similarly to the PriorityClassName on CompositePodGroupTemplate

Reviewer 2: Not true - we decided that we will not be resolving at the template level and it will be resolving it only on the runtime objects.

/cc @Argh4k

Author: Heh, it's essentially a copy-paste comment above the matching field in the `PodGroupSpec` - I think I even know the author of that initial comment...

Reworded.

	// (i.e. if no priority class is specified, admission control can set this to the global default

> 	// priority class if it exists. Otherwise, the composite pod group's priority will be zero).

Reviewer 2: nit: otherwise ... otherwise are somewhat hard to reason about to me :)

Author: Ditto remark about the copy-paste; reworded.

// for a CompositePodGroup.
type CompositePodGroupSchedulingConstraints struct {
	// Topology defines the topology constraints for the composite pod group.
	// Currently only a single topology constraint can be specified. This may change in the future.
	//
	// +optional
	// +listType=atomic
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:maxItems=1
	// +k8s:listType=atomic
	Topology []TopologyConstraint
}
```

Despite having a separate structure storing the constraints for the
`CompositePodGroup` API, we will reuse the `TopologyConstraint` struct that is
already used in the `PodGroupSchedulingConstraints` type.

When scheduler attempts to schedule a hierarchy of groups that specifies
topological constraints on multiple levels, these constraints will be resolved
in a top-down manner. This means that such constraints should be ordered from
least constrictive ones to to the ones defining the smallest topology domains.

##### Disruption mode, priority class name and priority

The idea of disruption mode generalizes naturally to the `CompositePodGroup`
API:

```go
// DisruptionMode defines how individual entities within a composite pod group can be disrupted.
// Exactly one mode must be set.
// +union

> type CompositeDisruptionMode struct {

Reviewer 2: naming brainstorming: GroupDisruptionMode maybe?

Author: I'm fine with either - I'm also fine with postponing the discussion about the precise naming to the implementation phase.

	// Single specifies that children can be disrupted independently from each other.
	//
	// +optional
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:unionMember
	Single *SingleCompositeDisruptionMode

	// All specifies that all children can only be disrupted together.
	//
	// +optional
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:unionMember
	All *AllCompositeDisruptionMode
}

// SingleCompositeDisruptionMode means that individual children of a CompositePodGroup
// can be disrupted or preempted independently.
type SingleCompositeDisruptionMode struct {
	// This is intentionally empty.
}

// AllCompositeDisruptionMode means that children of a CompositePodGroup can only be
// disrupted or preempted together.
type AllCompositeDisruptionMode struct {
	// This is intentionally empty.
}
```

> TODO: discuss the semantics of different DisruptionModes in detail, including

Reviewer 3: +1, with multi-level we now introduce a possibility of introducing semantically unclear configurations, e.g.

root CPG - ALL
child CPG - CHILDREN

What does it mean?

what to with gang group with basic child groups.

The `Priority` and the `PriorityClassName` fields are resolved in the exact same
way as they already are for Pods and `PodGroups` - specifically, the `Priority`
admission controller gets extended to additionally support the
`CompositePodGroup` API.

The value of the `Priority` field is being used in the following two contexts:

- `CompositePodGroup` objects without a parent reference are being put in the
  scheduling queue. Their priority is taken into account by the PrioritySort
  plugin when determining the importance of scheduling unit.
- When running preemption to fit a `CompositePodGroup` in the cluster, only
  lower priority preemption units could be selected as prospective victims. This
  includes other `CompositePodGroup` victims with the `All` disruption mode.

> 

Reviewer 3: We should add something about potential priority heterogeneity in workload (e.g. CPG, PG, Pod with different proritites) and what we plan to do about it

Reviewer 2: It needs much more detailed discussion, but I would suggest postponing that for Beta.
In Alpha we can assume that everything within a tree has the same priority.

For Beta, we will need to discuss different options, including:
- for basic policy, it's a valid scenario that individual children has different priorities
  But that opens a question what entity do we put into a scheduling queue:
  (a) if we put that CPG, than what priority do we use, because that may result in lower priority pods to be processed without waiting for their turn or alternatively higher priority pods waiting unnecessarily...
  (b) if we put individual children - then don't we loose some guarantees about context of full workload in the scheduling?

- for gangs - it seems like an invalid usecase to have different priorities across children

etc.

Reviewer 11: Could we resolve this by saying that in alpha the priority should be the same for all pods? IIRC we had some discussion recently during sig meeting that currently we won't allow for different priorities?

Reviewer 3: Done.

#### Status

> TODO

Reviewer 3: An interesting question is whether we envision situation where CPG and child (C)PG status differs? I guess  , this has use-case once we get into (partial) rescheduling, but till then I imagine status will be the same across the whole runtime tree, won't it?

Reviewer 11: In my opinion the status should be scoped to the entity it describes, i.e, CPG can say that _minGroupCount is not satisfied_, while the PG can say that _minCount is not satisfied_ or even that _minCount is satisfied, but some parent's constraints aren't_.

Reviewer 2: +1 to scoping the that individual object (I wouldn't mention anything about the parent there)

So going back to the original question - for gangs and current semantics of PodGroupSchedule condition, they will always be the same. But if the condition would start reflecting current state or last scheduling attempt, that's not longer true anymore.

type CompositePodGroupStatus struct {
	// Conditions represent the latest observations of the CompositePodGroup's state.
	//
	// +optional
	// +patchMergeKey=type
	// +patchStrategy=merge
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=type
	Conditions []metav1.Condition
}
```

### API consumption model

The `CompositePodGroup` API is intended to be used in a similar way to how the
`PodGroup` API is supposed to be used according to [KEP-4671].

The following sequence of events describes the lifecycle and responsibilities of
various actors in the cluster in a happy path:

1. User creates a true workload (e.g. `JobSet`),
2. Controller (e.g. `JobSet` controller) creates the Workload object,
3. Controller creates all groups in the scheduling hierarchy, from root
   (`CompositePodGroup`) to leaves (`PodGroups`),
4. Workload's Pods are getting created (by e.g. the Job controller),
5. kube-scheduler tends to scheduling the Pods,
6. User deletes the true workload,
7. Pods are deleted by the GC controller in kube-controller-manager,
8. Groups in the scheduling hierarchy are deleted by the GC controller, from
   leaves to the root.

> TODO - mention shortly some unhappy path scenarios?

Reviewer 3: Personally, I don't think this is needed. This should be part of the further controller integrations with CPG KEPs.

Author: Dropped the TODO.

approach is applied to the `CompositePodGroup` objects.

To ensure "bottom-up" garbage collection of the scheduling groups hierarchy, we
extend the idea introduced in [KEP-4671] that leverages finalizers to
additionally take `CompositePodGroups` into account. Specifically:

- the `PodGroupProtection` admission plugin adds a dedicated finalizer to newly
  created `CompositePodGroups`,
- the `PodGroup` protection controller removes that finalizer from a
  `CompositePodGroup` when it has a deletion timestamp and no child groups exist
  for that `CompositePodGroup` anymore.

### API validation

This section contains complicated validation that need to be executed when the
new API is being used. Simple and obvious checks that can be easily covered
today by the declarative validation are left out on purpose here since they are
already embedded in the API snippets in paragraphs above.

#### `Workload`

`Workload` object now contains a hierarchy of templates that could have a large
depth. While some workloads might have convoluted hierarchy, we do not want to
allow arbitrarily large tree structures. We start with supporting the depth of

> group template hierarchy of up to 3 levels. This should suffice for all use

Reviewer 3: What about disaggregated inference with Min X Ps and min Y Ds and frontend? Don't we need 4 levels in such a case?

Author: Fixed.

the whole template hierarchy in a single `Workload` object - otherwise, template
references would be ambiguous.

To verify both of these conditions, we will add a new admission plugin that
targets new `Workload` objects and performs both of these checks.

#### Runtime validation of group structure

TODO - discuss the validation of parents and the following:

- we need to dynamically check in kube-scheduler that group hierarchy doesn't
  contain a cycle and its height is not too long,
- checking these conditions in kube-apiserver's admission layer is not enough
  (and would result in best effort validation only in HA control plane setups),
- when kube-scheduler discovers either of those two conditions, it updates the
  status of the groups, deeming these groups invalid (as well as the ones that
  come after).

### Changes in kube-scheduler

#### Multi-level scheduling

The introduction of the `CompositePodGroup` API modifies the space of possible
scheduling units. So far, Kubernetes handled two possible kinds of scheduling
units - `PodGroups` and Pods that didn't belong to `PodGroups`.

The proposal modifies the set of scheduling unit types in Kubernetes.

> Specifically, scheduler will essentially process the following types of objects

Reviewer 2: nit: this wording is misleading - it will be processing the other objects too, but implicitly

So instead of saying about "objects being processed" - let's rephrase it to talk about objects that are queued in the scheduling queues.

Reviewer 2: I see that mentioned below now - but I still think this wording is somewhat misleading.

Author: Rearranged and rephrased sentences here and there - WDYT now?

- `CompositePodGroups` without a parent reference.

In other words, new scheduling units correspond to the roots of scheduling
hierarchies. Such units will be enqueued in the scheduling queue and popped by
the scheduler accordingly. The PrioritySort plugin continues determining the
order in the scheduling queue and its logic gets extended to the new space of
scheduling units in a natural way, i.e. the priority of the scheduling hierarchy
root determines the order in the queue.

TODO - describe the changes required to handle waiting mechanism for multi-level
gang scheduling in the `GangScheduling` plugin:
- `PreEnqueue`
- `Permit`
- Queuing hints

##### Scheduling sequence for Pods

When processing an individual `PodGroup` in a scheduling cycle iteration,
scheduler follows a certain logic that pertains the sequence in which Pods
belonging to that particular `PodGroup` are being scheduled. We need to
establish analogous logic for the `CompositePodGroup` whenever scheduler pops
one from the scheduling queue.

In most use cases, `PodGroup` contains homogeneous Pods. Because of that, it
makes sense to schedule Pods from a single `PodGroup` sequentially to take

> advantage of opportunistic batching. Taking this into account, we propose the

Reviewer 3: If the alternative to sequential scheduling is parallel scheduling (which I assume it is), I am not sure I follow the opportunistic batching argument here. Even without opportunistic batching, we would still process Pods sequentially since that is the fundamental execution model of the current scheduling framework, right?

Author: I'm not sure I follow - what do you mean by "parallel scheduling" here precisely?

The argument I was trying to make here is that when establishing the order in which we perform sequential scheduling of Pods belonging to a CPG, we shouldn't interleave the Pods from different PGs in the established order - because otherwise, in case of homogeneous PGs, we'd lose the performance benefit that opportunistic batching brings about. Depending on a workload characteristics and its size, that benefit might be non-trivial.

following approach when computing the order of processing Pods belonging to a
`CompositePodGroup`:

1. Firstly, we enumerate all `PodGroups` that are descendants of a
   `CompositePodGroup`,
2. Next, we sort those `PodGroups` according to some criteria,
3. Lastly, we will go over these `PodGroups` in order established above and
   schedule Pods belonging to the individual `PodGroup` sequentially.

For 2., we can start with something simple in alpha, like e.g. sorting
`PodGroups` by their creation timestamp, and changing that logic in beta if

> necessary.

Reviewer 11: It would be slightly easier to implement this when the sorting is based on the Pod's timestamp (PodGroup object may not exist when the pod is added to the queue, and gated on PreEnqueue)

Reviewer 2: Why? At this point we already have access to everything (because we popped that from the queue).

Reviewer 11: We have to keep the structure sorted in some way in the scheduling queue as well. Do we want to re-sort it on the pop anyway? If we have clear benefits of relying on the PodGroup creation timestamp, I'm okay. Otherwise, I don't see a point in not using pod timestamp.

For 3., we can reuse the logic that is leveraged by the scheduler already when
it processes single `PodGroups`.

TODO: discuss the problem of scheduling CPGs that did not manage to get
scheduled because of the sequence imposed here.

#### Integration with workload-aware preemption

> If a `CompositePodGroup` cannot fit, `kube-scheduler` will perform similar steps

Reviewer 3: We should make it clear that this applies only for the root CPG, not child CPG

Author: Done.

to the ones when processing a single `PodGroup`. Specifically, if preemption
would not help in making a particular `CompositePodGroup` schedulable, it is put
back to the scheduling queue. On the other hand, if preemption would actually
make the `CompositePodGroup` schedulable, scheduler:

- spawns the preemption goroutines for the calculated victims,
- moves the `CompositePodGroup` to the unschedulable queue,

> - blocks its move into the active queue until all victims are successfully

Reviewer 2: It's not really until all victims are successfully preempted, because we can find a new place for it in the meantime.

But I wouldn't get into discussing that - instead just said that it's completely analogous to PG.

/cc @Argh4k

  preempted.

To achieve this, we need to:

- Adapt the relevant `PodGroup` preemption abstractions and data structures to
  cover the use case of `CompositePodGroup` as preemptor,
- Adjust the logic responsible for computing prospective victims to account for
  the `CompositePodGroup` objects with the `All` disruption mode,
- Adapt the `PreEnqueue` method of `DefaultPreemption` plugin to
  `CompositePodGroup` preemptors,
- Invoke the workload-aware preemption for `CompositePodGroup` when needed in
  the scheduling cycle.

#### Multi-level topology-aware scheduling

TODO - describe the greedy recursive algorithm.

##### Preemption in topology-aware scheduling

TODO

### Test Plan

[X] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

N/A

##### Unit tests

TODO

##### Integration tests

TODO

##### e2e tests

TODO

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- New `CompositePodGroup` API is introduced behind the `CompositePodGroup`
  feature gate.

> - New fields in `Workload` and `PodGroup` APIs are introduced behind the

Reviewer 2: Actually - some of the changes (e.g. TemplateReference) we should make as part of v1alpha3 & beta creation PRs - because we can't change them independently later.

@dom4ha @macsko

  `CompositePodGroup` when it has a deletion timestamp and no child groups exist
  for that `CompositePodGroup` anymore.

### API validation

This section contains complicated validation that need to be executed when the
new API is being used. Simple and obvious checks that can be easily covered
today by the declarative validation are left out on purpose here since they are
already embedded in the API snippets in paragraphs above.

#### `Workload`

`Workload` object now contains a hierarchy of templates that could have a large
depth. While some workloads might have convoluted hierarchy, we do not want to
allow arbitrarily large tree structures. We start with supporting the depth of
group template hierarchy of up to 4 levels. This should suffice for all use
cases that we are aware of today - if future proves otherwise, however, we could
revisit this limit and bump it up further.

Apart from that, we also need to validate uniqueness of template names within
the whole template hierarchy in a single `Workload` object - otherwise, template
references would be ambiguous.

To verify both of these conditions, we will add a new admission plugin that

> targets new `Workload` objects and performs both of these checks.

Reviewer 2: They operate at the level of an individual object, so why can't we use hand-written validation?
Admission plugins sounds like an overkill to me here.

Also - would addressing any of those in DV be possible?
@jpbetz @yongruilin

Reviewer 3: I updated the text to use hand-written validation. 

Whether this can be done via DV remains open. @yongruilin, could you take a look?

Reviewer 9: DV does't plan to support either the depth limit or the uniqueness within a embedded hierarchy, as it is not a common case. So it needs to rely on the hand-written validation atm.

Reviewer 3: Thanks, resolving this comment then.

any of these modes, it will update the status of all the groups within the group
hierarchy accordingly (i.e. deeming those groups invalid) and will not proceed
to scheduling it at all.

### Changes in kube-scheduler

#### Multi-level scheduling

So far, Kubernetes handled two possible kinds of scheduling units - `PodGroups`
and Pods that didn't belong to `PodGroups`. Such units corresponded one-to-one
to the units enqueued in the scheduling queue that were popped by the scheduler
and later passed to the scheduling cycle.

The introduction of `CompositePodGroup` API naturally evolves the space of
possible scheduling units. In principle, a scheduling unit is a tree-shaped
group hierarchy and this induces the following types of entities that will be
stored in the scheduling queue:

- Pods not belonging to a `PodGroup`,
- `PodGroups` without a parent reference,
- `CompositePodGroups` without a parent reference.

The PrioritySort plugin continues determining the order in the scheduling queue
and its logic gets extended to the new types of scheduling units in a natural
way, i.e. the priority of the scheduling hierarchy root determines the order in
the queue.

> TODO - describe the changes required to handle waiting mechanism for multi-level

Reviewer 2: Please fill in

Reviewer 3: Done.

For multi-level scheduling using `CompositePodGroups` (which do not own pods directly but instead act as parents for nested `CompositePodGroups` or leaf `PodGroups`), the scheduler resolves placements **recursively** down the hierarchy tree:

##### CompositePodGroup Scheduling Algorithm

The scheduling of a `CompositePodGroup` (CPG) and its descendants under the multi-level topology-aware framework is resolved recursively:

1. **Placement Generation:** The scheduler generates candidate placements (topology domains matching the CPG's topology constraint). If a parent group has already been assumed in a specific placement, candidate generation at the current level is strictly restricted to placements located within that parent placement.
2. **Candidate Evaluation:** For each candidate placement of the CPG, the scheduler:
   * Temporarily assumes the candidate placement in memory.
   * **Recursive Child Resolution:** Resolves each child group down the hierarchy under the active in-memory context:
     * If the child is a nested `CompositePodGroup`, the scheduler recursively invokes this CPG scheduling algorithm.

>      * If the child is a leaf `PodGroup`, the scheduler invokes the standard, single-level topology scheduling cycle ([KEP-5732]) for that `PodGroup` (generating rack/node candidate placements restricted strictly to the assumed parent placement, simulating pod scheduling, scoring, and selecting the optimal choice).

Reviewer 2: nit: remove the "rack/"

>      * If any child group fails to schedule (returns infeasible), the current candidate parent CPG placement is marked as infeasible. Sibling child groups are not evaluated, and no backtracking between alternative child subtree placements is performed.

Reviewer 2: This is fine for Alpha, but I think we will want to be smarter for Beta.

So I would add a point that we will reevaluate this for Beta.

Reviewer 3: Done.

	// CompositePodGroup.
	// Controllers are expected to fill this field by copying it from a CompositePodGroupTemplate.
	// This field is immutable.
	// This field is only available when the TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling feature gate is enabled.
	//
	// +featureGate=TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling
	// +optional
	// +k8s:ifDisabled(TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling)=+k8s:forbidden
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling)=+k8s:optional
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(TopologyAwareWorkloadScheduling)=+k8s:immutable
	SchedulingConstraints *CompositePodGroupSchedulingConstraints

	// DisruptionMode defines the mode in which a given CompositePodGroup can be disrupted.
	// Controllers are expected to fill this field by copying it from a CompositePodGroupTemplate.
	// One of Single, All. Defaults to Single if unset. This field is immutable.
	//
	// This field is available only when the WorkloadAwarePreemption feature gate
	// is enabled.
	//
	// +featureGate=WorkloadAwarePreemption
	// +optional
	// +k8s:ifDisabled("WorkloadAwarePreemption")=+k8s:forbidden
	// +k8s:ifEnabled("WorkloadAwarePreemption")=+k8s:optional

> 	// +k8s:ifEnabled("WorkloadAwarePreemption")=+k8s:immutable

Reviewer 11: Since we are merging the WorkloadAwarePreemption feature gate into GenericWorkload, you can skip these feature gate checks and mentions entirely

Reviewer 3: Done.

```go
// CompositePodGroupStatus represents information about the status of a composite pod group.
type CompositePodGroupStatus struct {
	// Conditions represent the latest observations of the CompositePodGroup's state.
	//
	// Known condition types:
	// - "CompositePodGroupScheduled": Indicates whether the overall scheduling requirement
	//   for the subtree under this CompositePodGroup has been satisfied.
	// - "DisruptionTarget": Indicates whether the CompositePodGroup is about to be terminated
	//   due to disruption such as preemption.
	//
	// Known reasons for the CompositePodGroupScheduled condition:
	// - "Unschedulable": The CompositePodGroup's subtree could not be placed due to resource constraints,
	//   affinity/anti-affinity, or topological constraints.
	// - "SchedulerError": The CompositePodGroup cannot be scheduled due to some internal error
	//   that occurred during scheduling.
	// - "Invalid": Set to True when kube-scheduler detects an invalid group layout during
	//   runtime validation. The `message` field details the specific layout violation (such as

> 	//   a detected cycle, exceeding the maximum depth of 4, or referencing multiple distinct Workloads).

Reviewer 11: Should this be scheduler's responsibility to detect that or rather other component should perform the runtime validation?

Reviewer 3: It should be the scheduler. When we discussed a "separate controller" previously, I meant a separate logical loop within `kube-scheduler` to process `unschedulablePodGroups` and update their status (e.g. when they stay in that state for too long), not a standalone binary. Since the scheduler is the only consumer of these objects and holds the full context, it's best equipped to perform this validation.

Reviewer 2: +1 - it should be scheduler (also to avoid races between checking and scheduling itself)

Reviewer 11: So could we have it described somewhere? In particular, will it be a new loop in the scheduler, a new loop in the scheduling queue, or where? Will there be any possible races between the new loop and the scheduling queue or how will they interact to let the pod in? Also, scheduler will start watching for `Workload` objects, worth mentioning that in the scalability section.

Reviewer 8: > So could we have it described somewhere?

+1

> Also, scheduler will start watching for Workload objects, worth mentioning that in the scalability section.

Why do we need to start watching the Workload object? For validation?

Reviewer 11: > Why do we need to start watching the Workload object? For validation?

IIUC we would also want to validate whether the tree matches the Workload-defined tree, right?

Reviewer 8: Is the decision to use unique name for ParentCompositePodGroupName or a path? Both were discussed and we seem to pick a unique name.

If it was a path, we'd just need to verify whether the parent object path is a subset of the children one, without depending on the Workload object. In api-serve we'd only need to check whether the path is correctly formed against the Workload object.

I'd prefer that approach and keep scheduler unaware of the Workload, which is not a scheduling-oriented object. At the same time scheduler is not api verification component, so performing unrelated to scheduling verification seems odd to me.

Reviewer 3: > If it was a path, we'd just need to verify whether the parent object path is a subset of the children one, without depending on the Workload object. In api-serve we'd only need to check whether the path is correctly formed against the Workload object.

We should design the API to optimize for user experience rather than ease of validation. That's why I prefer the `parentName` approach.

I'll add a section about validation and potentially watching the `Workload` object. However, since we won't be implementing this in alpha, we can postpone the final decision until beta.

Reviewer 5: Back to my question above, why we cannot validate it in the admission phase?
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6017/changes#r3357443613

Reviewer 2: Cross-object validations are by-definition racy...

hierarchy accordingly (i.e. deeming those groups invalid) and will not proceed
to scheduling it at all.

### Changes in kube-scheduler

#### Multi-level gang scheduling

Below we describe the high-level changes in `kube-scheduler` required to
support multi-level gang scheduling.

##### Prerequisites
To enable multi-level gang scheduling, we must generalize internal data
structures, extend the core scheduling queue, and adapt plugin extension
points:

1. **Polymorphic `PodGroupInfo` Generalization:** In the internal scheduler
   implementation, the existing `PodGroupInfo` struct (which represents a
   scheduling group in queue memory and cache) is generalized to
   polymorphically represent both leaf `PodGroups` and `CompositePodGroups`.
   This unified representation significantly reduces code and interface
   duplication, allowing scheduling plugins to process all hierarchy levels
   uniformly.
2. **Scheduling Queue Support for CPGs:** The core scheduling queue is extended
   to natively support root `CompositePodGroups` (CPGs without a parent
   reference) and standalone `PodGroups` as the sole root scheduling units

>    enqueued in the active scheduling queue. To preserve this root-only queue

Reviewer 11: It can be in any scheduling queue:
```suggestion
   enqueued in the scheduling queue. To preserve this root-only queue
```

Reviewer 3: Done.

   property in the presence of unsynchronized object arrivals (e.g. a member
   pod arriving before its parent PG/CPG object is created/observed), unobserved
   groups are tracked in a dedicated `unschedulablePodGroups` structure and
   only moved into the active scheduling queue when the root of their

>    hierarchy (having no parent reference) is successfully observed and cached.

Reviewer 11: And pods should be probably put into `pendingPodGroupMembers` until the root (or the whole hierarchy?) arrives

Reviewer 3: Done.

3. **`PreEnqueue` Extension Point:** Currently, this extension point is
   defined strictly at the individual `Pod` level. We introduce/add support
   for `PreEnqueue` at the `PodGroupInfo` level (operating on CPG/PG groups) to
   recursively verify if the tree has enough active members to schedule before
   enqueuing.
   *(Note: Alternatively, PreEnqueue could operate at the Pod-level, requiring
   re-calculating parent CPG tree admissibility recursively for every member
   pod. For Alpha, we will evaluate both approaches and select the simplest,
   using the group-level PreEnqueue point as the KEP's default baseline, and
   finalize on Beta).*

> 4. **`PlacementFeasible` Extension Point:** Currently, this extension point

Reviewer 11: Gang scheduling plugin also uses a `Permit` extension point, even with `PlacementFeasible` being implemented, to re-verify the scheduling constraints when moving pods to binding. We can consider whether this will be really needed long-term, but for now, I think, `Permit` should be listed here as well.

Reviewer 3: Done.

>    exists at the `PodGroup` level (introduced in PR #138643). We extend this

Reviewer 11: Not sure whether the PR is linked correctly. I think you have to put the whole link to the k/k PR

Reviewer 3: Done.

   existing extension point under our polymorphic `PodGroupInfo` representation
   to support the validation of hierarchical constraints at the
   `CompositePodGroup` level.

> ##### GangScheduling Plugin Changes

Reviewer 11: Also, EventsToRegister of GangScheduling plugin have to track the CompositePodGroup events similarly to PodGroup ones?

Reviewer 3: Is this needed given that we won't be adding CPGs to the active queue until the CPG is actually observed?

Reviewer 11: Will we allow for mutability of `MinGroupCount` from day 1? If yes, GangScheduling would need to subscribe on CPG/Update event, at least.

But wait, we could get a valid and complete hierarchy, but still don't meet the `MinGroupCount`. Then, the CPG root will be blocked on the PreEnqueue, so the gating plugin (GangScheduling) has to subscribe on the `CPG/Add` event, right?

Reviewer 3: Yes, even if we disallow `MinGroupCount` mutability (which I think I prefer to reduce the scope), the runtime CPG/PG tree can still change, affecting `PreEnqueue` results. You're right; I will add this to the KEP.

1. **`PreEnqueue`:**
   Executed strictly on the root node (represented by a root `PodGroupInfo`
   object) of the popped hierarchy. It recursively verifies that the subtree

>    contains the required minimum quantities:

Reviewer 11: Could you add that the PreEnqueue can unblock the CompositePodGroups with child that has less pods than `minCount` and that it's an expected behavior in some cases?

Reviewer 3: Are you referring to the example we discussed today? The CPG with `MinGroupCount=3`, 3 PGs with satisfied gang requirements, and one PG with `minCount=10` but only 5 pods? If so, this example and observation are described below in the "Inadmissible child groups" section.

Reviewer 11: Right, it's okay then

   * **For a leaf `PodGroup`:** Verifies if the group is `admissible` (total
     pending or running member pods in the cluster $\ge$ `minCount`).
   * **For a `CompositePodGroup`:** Verifies that the number of `admissible`
     child groups in its subtree $\ge$ `minGroupCount`.
   * If the root-level check fails, the scheduling unit is rejected and remains
     in the unschedulable queue.

> 2. **`PlacementFeasible`:**

Reviewer 11: TBH it's hard to read these changes without reading the "Recursive Scheduling Cycle Execution" that is described below

Reviewer 3: I rewrote some of those sections. Hopefully, it reads better now, but I kept the order. This falls under gang scheduling changes, which I think are prerequisites to the algorithm.

Reviewer: felt the same as macsko

   Executed at each level (for both leaf and nested parent `PodGroupInfo`
   objects) during in-memory simulation to determine if a group satisfies

>    active member constraints. Under this KEP, we extend the existing

Reviewer 11: What do you mean that it will be executed at each level? What will be passed as an arg to this extension point in the `podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm`? Will there be any other places where the `PlacementFeasible` will be called?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I wrote "level" to convey that we call this for both PG and CPG, but I guess it's more accurate to say that we call this for every `PodGroupInfo` instance in the tree. Updated. PTAL.

       `minGroupCount`.
     - **`Unschedulable`:** Returned if in-memory scheduled child groups <
       `minGroupCount`, but the sum of scheduled groups and remaining child
       groups $\ge$ `minGroupCount` (indicating the CPG is currently
       unschedulable but remains resolvable in future passes).
     - **`UnschedulableAndUnresolvable`:** Returned if the sum of scheduled
       groups and remaining admissible child groups < `minGroupCount` (the
       parent CPG is mathematically impossible to schedule), immediately
       aborting the recursive cycle early.

##### Recursive Scheduling Cycle Execution
In `schedule_one_podgroup.go`, the scheduler processes a popped root unit (a root
`PodGroupInfo`) by running the recursive **`podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm`**
routine. Throughout this recursive simulation phase, all pod-to-node assignments
are tracked strictly **in memory** in the `nodeInfoSnapshot` as temporary state
before final binding:

1. **If the active node is a leaf `PodGroup`:** Runs the flat, single-level
   `PodGroupSchedulingAlgorithm` (simulating member pod placements in memory)
   and returns the status.
2. **If the active node is a `CompositePodGroup`:**

>    * Recursively executes `podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` for each child

Reviewer 11: `podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` is now self-contained, meaning it reverts the snapshot state to a version it was before execution. Implementing this recursive algorithm will require changes to the `podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` not to revert the assumed pods?

Reviewer 3: Yes, we'll need to change that. Added a subsection on that. PTAL

> scheduling complexity at the cost of sub-optimal decisions that may trigger
> preemption. While sufficient for the **Alpha** phase, these greedy
> scheduling algorithm trade-offs will be re-evaluated for the **Beta**
> release to explore bounded backtracking heuristics (such as restricted
> search depth or bounded branches) that optimize overall scheduling success
> rates.

##### Scheduling sequence for PodGroups

To ensure a deterministic processing sequence, child groups under a
`CompositePodGroup` are sorted and cached inside the scheduling queue when the
group objects are added to queue memory. During the scheduling cycle, the
scheduler evaluates descendant child groups in this pre-sorted order.

For the **Alpha** release, we can start with something simple, like e.g. sorting
`PodGroups` / `CompositePodGroups` by their creation timestamp, and changing that
that logic in beta if necessary.

###### Preemption triggering rules
Preemption is strictly evaluated and executed only at the root level of the
group hierarchy, preventing isolated and competing preemption passes at
intermediate levels.

Consistent with flat gang scheduling ([KEP-4671]), direct scheduling and

> preemption never occur inside the same scheduling cycle. If a root CPG is popped

Reviewer 11: Shouldn't be "binding"?
```suggestion
Consistent with flat gang scheduling ([KEP-4671]), direct binding and
preemption never occur inside the same scheduling cycle. If a root CPG is popped
```

Reviewer 3: Done.

from the queue, the recursive scheduling cycle evaluates direct in-memory
placement feasibility, resulting in exactly one of four distinct runtime
preemption and binding cases:

> 1. **Minimal Gang is Unresolvable (`PlacementFeasible = UnschedulableAndUnresolvable`):**

Reviewer 11: How does the `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable` work with the current version (https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/138643) of this extension point, where `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable` means that the PodGroup is no longer schedulable in the given cycle, but the preemption can still be effective. It works as an optimization to stop processing the pods further, when we know the minCount can no longer be met. Here you propose a different meaning of that status.

Reviewer 11: I'm not sure if I also fully follow the differences between the Unresolvable and Resolvable gangs

Reviewer 3: Good catch, thanks! I think when I decided to go in this direction rather than calling `PreEnqueue` again in the algorithm to solve the "Inadmissible child groups" problem, I made a mental leap and changed the semantics of `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable` in my head. Looks like if we want to use `PlacementFeasible` to distinguish between `Unschedulable` and `PreemptionCanHelp` vs. `Unschedulable` and `PreemptionCannotHelp`, we would need another status or a different approach. 

Let me think more about this.

Reviewer 11: Theoretically we could adjust the current PlacementFeasible statuses like this:
- Change `Unschedulable` to `Wait` to say that we don't yet have enough pods being scheduled, but meeting the constraint is still possible
- Change `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable` to `Unschedulable` to say that the constraints can no longer be met, but the preemption could help
- Use `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable` in the context that you wanted, so when the preemption cannot help

Reviewer 2: +1
I like the proposed adjustment - it makes it much more intuitive imho.

Reviewer: +1 for @macsko's idea, if we need to distinguish "gang that preemption might help" vs "gang that preemption won't help". But, what kind of scheduling failures go to which?

Reviewer 3: Done. After thinking about it, this is indeed cleaner and beneficial even for flat PGs.

@sanposhiho - Regarding different scheduling failures, I described this in detail in the `##### GangScheduling Plugin Changes` section.

Here are the examples for a CPG with `MinGroupCount=10`:

* If we have less than 10 children or we have 12 but we get `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable` for the first 3 children, we return `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable`. Preemption will not help.
* If we have 10 children and we get `Unschedulable` for the first child, we return `Unschedulable`. It doesn't make sense to process this CPG anymore (since it cannot be scheduled), but preemption may help here, so we should trigger it.
* If we have 12 children and we get `Success` for the 1st child and `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable` or `Unschedulable` for the 2nd and 3rd child, we return `Wait`. It is still mathematically possible to schedule the CPG using the free capacity in the cluster.
* If we have 12 children, once we successfully schedule 10 children, we return `Success`.

The same logic can apply to PG with pods where they get either `Unschedulable` or `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable` scheduling results.

child group from reaching its `minCount` and causing the entire root CPG gang
to fail scheduling.

To resolve this, we will introduce a **non-greedy** scheduling cycle mode:
* **Alpha:** The scheduling cycle is greedy. Resource stealing in constrained
  hierarchies is a known limitation in the Alpha phase.
* **Beta:** We will implement a non-greedy in-memory scheduling mode. During the
  initial scheduling of a CPG, the CPG-level `PlacementFeasible` checker will
  stop placing extra pods once the parent's `minGroupCount` child group limits
  are met. The CPG is committed, and subsequent cycles will process additional
  pods greedily once capacity is available.

We can implement this behavior in two ways for the Beta phase:
* **Double-run in a single cycle:** The scheduler runs the recursive algorithm
  twice in a single active scheduling cycle (first pass non-greedy for minimal gang,
  second pass greedy for extras).
* **Distinct scheduling cycles (Preferred):** The scheduler runs a single
  non-greedy pass in the active cycle, commits the minimal gang, and lets
  extra pending member pods trigger separate, subsequent scheduling cycles

>   (running in greedy mode) to place the remaining pods.

Reviewer 11: This may cause choosing a worse TAS placement, because the algorithm will stop evaluation after minCount is met, scoring only the placements with minCount pods. When continuing during the same scheduling cycle, the TAS could prefer the placements where more pods will fit or the utilization will be higher. When doing second pass in a subsequent cycle, the placement choice is already commited.

Reviewer 3: That's a good point. For TAS, a single cycle might be actually better in the current shape of the system. In the future, once we have homogeneous PodGroups with PodTemplate, we can go back to the `desiredCount` idea which solves a similar problem. 

Let me think about this more. Leaving the comment open if others have thoughts on this.

Reviewer 2: In my mental model, the huge majority of cases is where minCount=podCount - which makes this whole discussion moot. This is the primary usecase that I want to solve in the Alpha.

If we get to minCount<podCount, I agree that two-cycles may lead to less optimal choice with TAS (and TBH not only with TAS, but with any cross-pod requirements, e.g. pod affinity). But I would suggest postponing that and wait for real usage data to propose heuristics to improve that based on those.

Reviewer 8: I left a proposal how this concern could be addressed in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6017#discussion_r3316300894. It won't be idea either as it could pick too big TAS option and not use it.

I think we need to admit we won't be able to ever able to achieve the most optimal placement decisions and any optimization should not be a part of this KEP (API should be orthogonal to the actual algorithm). At the same time I don't see any blockers from extending the scheduling logic to implement future scheduling strategies that include backtracking, DFS, BFS.

Reviewer 11: So, given that we have some ideas how to solve this (https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6017#discussion_r3316300894) and it's not immediately that problematic, let's defer the discussion to beta, as we don't want to introduce the double-pass algorithm for alpha anyway.

topology constraint of `block` (demanding that all groups land inside a single
net-block), while both `PG-1` and `PG-2` require a `rack` topology constraint.

The cluster physical topology is configured as follows:
* `block-A` contains `rack-A1` (has 3 free slots) and `rack-A2` (has 5 free slots).
* `block-B` contains `rack-B1` (has 5 free slots) and `rack-B2` (has 5 free slots).

The scheduling algorithm resolves this hierarchy recursively:

1. **CPG-root Evaluation:**
   * Generates block placements for `CPG-root`: `block-A` and `block-B`.
   * **Evaluate Candidate `block-A`:**
     1. Temporarily assumes `block-A` in `nodeInfoSnapshot`.
     2. **Resolve child `PG-1` under `block-A`:**
        * Restricted to `block-A`. Invokes standard flat PG scheduling cycle.
        * `PG-1` generates rack candidate placements in `block-A`: `rack-A1` and
          `rack-A2`.
        * The scheduler simulates `PG-1` under candidates in `nodeInfoSnapshot`:
          - Simulates `PG-1` under `rack-A1` $\to$ fails (only 3 slots free).
          - Simulates `PG-1` under `rack-A2` $\to$ succeeds (5 slots free).
        * PG-level scorer plugins evaluate feasible candidates: only `rack-A2`

>           is feasible, and is selected.

Reviewer 11: How should this work with a double-pass algorithm? Currently, TAS prefers the placements on which more pods can be scheduled, but how scheduling above the minCount can be achieved?

Reviewer 3: In alpha, we'll be doing a single pass only. Please note that this problem also exists for single-level PodGroup TAS, as pointed out in [#6076](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6076#discussion_r3310024055), where we agreed it's an unavoidable tradeoff.

Reviewer 11: Could you mention somewhere in the KEP that the potential two-pass algorithm wouldn't work ideally with TAS?

Reviewer 3: Done in the `###### Resource stealing under greedy evaluation` section

APIs are often characterized with. `JobSet`[^1] and `LeaderWorkerSet`[^2] are
probably the most popular instances of a higher-order API where such hierarchy
exists which often bring about matching scheduling requirements like the ones
mentioned above. To close these gaps, we need to extend the foundational
scheduling APIs in a way that the true workload controllers can express their
multi-level scheduling requirements that kube-scheduler could understand and act
upon accordingly.

### Goals

- Define a new API that facilitates describing the hierarchy of a workload.
- Extend scheduling capabilities to support hierarchical scheduling
  requirements, including:
  - Multi-level gang scheduling.
  - Multi-level preemption policies
  - Multi-level topology scheduling constraints.
- Ensure future extensibility of the API with new scheduling and disruption
  policies.

### Non-Goals

- Extend topology-aware scheduling with the notion of preferred constraints.
- Define the way how to express multi-level scheduling requirements in true
  workload APIs.
  - This will be addressed in a KEP spawned from a discussion in

>     [API Design for WAS Controller Integration](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VG7Zto9JYuPG4Anb01WMRryJlfV6met0jgob3T2NjZ4/edit?usp=sharing).

Reviewer 12: As this is already tracked in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/6089 (PR https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6092), can we link to the new kep ID?

Reviewer 3: Done.

	// +k8s:immutable
	PodGroupTemplates []PodGroupTemplate
}
```

Policy- and constraints-related fields were omitted from the template definition
for brevity and clarity - we will discuss them in detail in the deep dive
section about the `CompositePodGroup` below. These fields have matching
structure and semantics as the fields in `CompositePodGroupTemplate` and their
values are supposed to be copied from the template on the `CompositePodGroup`
creation.

### Changes to the `PodGroup` API

There are two changes to the `PodGroup` spec:

- `PodGroupTemplateRef` field gets replaced with an optional `WorkloadRef` that
  contains a reference to the `Workload` together with a name of a template
  within that `Workload` object.
- New field called `ParentCompositePodGroupName` is added which denotes a name
  of an optional parent `CompositePodGroup` object.

```go
// PodGroupSpec defines the desired state of a PodGroup.
type PodGroupSpec struct {
	// ... existing fields ...

	// WorkloadRef references an optional PodGroup template within the Workload
	// object that was used to create the PodGroup.
	// This field is immutable.
	//
	// +optional
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:immutable

>   // +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:dependentRequired("parentCompositePodGroupName")

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:dependentRequired("parentCompositePodGroupName")
```

	WorkloadRef *WorkloadReference `json:"workloadRef"`

	// ParentCompositePodGroupName contains the name of the parent composite pod group
	// within the same namespace as this pod group.
	// If it's nil, then this pod group is a root of a workload's hierarchy.
	// This field is used only when the CompositePodGroup feature gate is enabled.
	// This field is immutable.
	//
	// +featureGate=CompositePodGroup
	// +optional
	// +k8s:ifDisabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:forbidden
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:optional
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:immutable
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:format=k8s-long-name

>   // +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:dependentRequired("workloadRef")

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:dependentRequired("workloadRef")
```

release.

The value of the `Priority` field is being used in the following two contexts:

- `CompositePodGroup` objects without a parent reference are being put in the
  scheduling queue. Their priority is taken into account by the PrioritySort
  plugin when determining the importance of scheduling unit.
- When running preemption to fit a `CompositePodGroup` in the cluster, only
  lower priority preemption units could be selected as prospective victims. This
  includes other `CompositePodGroup` victims with the `All` disruption mode.

#### Status

Analogous to `PodGroupStatus`, `CompositePodGroupStatus` represents the observed state of a `CompositePodGroup`.

```go
// CompositePodGroupStatus represents information about the status of a composite pod group.
type CompositePodGroupStatus struct {
	// Conditions represent the latest observations of the CompositePodGroup's state.
	//
	// Known condition types:
	// - "CompositePodGroupInitiallyScheduled": Indicates whether the overall scheduling requirement
	//   for the subtree under this CompositePodGroup has been satisfied. Once this condition
  //   transitions to True, it serves as a terminal state and will never revert to False,

>   //   even if pods are subsequently deleted and group constraints are no longer met.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
	//   transitions to True, it serves as a terminal state and will never revert to False,
	//   even if pods are subsequently deleted and group constraints are no longer met.
```

     promoted when their full hierarchy, including the root CPG, is successfully
     observed and enqueued.
3. **`PreEnqueue` Extension Point:** Currently, this extension point is
   defined strictly at the individual `Pod` level. We introduce/add support
   for `PreEnqueue` at the `PodGroupInfo` level (operating on CPG/PG groups) to
   recursively verify if the tree has enough active members to schedule before
   enqueuing.
   *(Note: Alternatively, PreEnqueue could operate at the Pod-level, requiring
   re-calculating parent CPG tree admissibility recursively for every member
   pod. For Alpha, we will evaluate both approaches and select the simplest,
   using the group-level PreEnqueue point as the KEP's default baseline, and
   finalize on Beta).*
4. **`PlacementFeasible` Extension Point:** Currently, this extension point
   exists at the `PodGroup` level (introduced in [PR #138643](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/138643)).
   We extend this existing extension point under our polymorphic `PodGroupInfo`
   representation to support the validation of hierarchical constraints at the
   `CompositePodGroup` level.

> 5. **`Permit` Extension Point:** Currently, the `Permit` extension point is

Reviewer 6: Is this section updated for https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/138643? 

IIUC we are going to get rid of the Permit in `podGroupPodSchedulingAlgorithm` and the `Permit` during the PreBind will be pretty much a no-op for the gangscheduling plugin in WAS.

Reviewer 3: See https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6017/changes/BASE..949d8cb7f1265f6ae8e4fd8533881b99e4c30cda#r3304057095

Reviewer 6: So we could add `where flat gang scheduling blocks member pods from binding until minCount pods are scheduled.`

Reviewer 3: Done.

     CPG):**
     We override the flat group-level checks. When a member pod is evaluated,
     the plugin climbs parent references up to the root CPG ancestor. It
     traverses the entire hierarchy tree structure in the permit cache
     (ensuring all nested child groups satisfy parent `minGroupCount` and
     child `minCount` thresholds) starting at this root level, releasing the
     waiting member pods for final binding only when the entire tree's
     constraints are satisfied.

##### Recursive Scheduling Cycle Execution
In `schedule_one_podgroup.go`, the scheduler processes a popped root unit (a root
`PodGroupInfo`) by running the recursive **`podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm`**
routine. Throughout this recursive simulation phase, all pod-to-node assignments
are tracked strictly **in memory** in the `nodeInfoSnapshot` as temporary state
before final binding:

1. **If the active node is a leaf `PodGroup`:** Runs the same logic as in the
   flat, single-level `PodGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` (simulating member
   pod placements in memory) and returns the status.
2. **If the active node is a `CompositePodGroup`:**

>    * Recursively executes `podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` for each child

Reviewer 6: What is the order of that execution? Will we always order children in the same manner? Is it possible that the order will differ between attempts? Maybe if we randomize the order, we can treat it as some solution for heterogenous workloads in alpha (just wait for retry, it might yield a better result)? And then one of the potential improvements for beta, instead of implementing the backtracking would be to implement better heuristics for ordering the children within CPG (priority within CPG?).

Reviewer 6: Oh, I can see that we define later the scheduling sequence for PodGroups.

     group (storing simulated assignments in memory).

>    * Invokes the extended `PlacementFeasible` checker under `PodGroupInfo`,

Reviewer 6: It's called after evaluating each children right? And if we hit `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable` we do an early return, right?

probably the most popular instances of a higher-order API where such hierarchy
exists which often bring about matching scheduling requirements like the ones
mentioned above. To close these gaps, we need to extend the foundational
scheduling APIs in a way that the true workload controllers can express their
multi-level scheduling requirements that kube-scheduler could understand and act
upon accordingly.

### Goals

- Define a new API that facilitates describing the hierarchy of a workload.
- Extend scheduling capabilities to support hierarchical scheduling
  requirements, including:
  - Multi-level gang scheduling.
  - Multi-level preemption policies
  - Multi-level topology scheduling constraints.
- Ensure future extensibility of the API with new scheduling and disruption
  policies.

### Non-Goals

- Extend topology-aware scheduling with the notion of preferred constraints.
- Define the way how to express multi-level scheduling requirements in true
  workload APIs.
  - This will be addressed in a [KEP-6089](https://kep.k8s.io/6089).
- Add support for associating `ResourceClaims` with instances of the new API.

>   - We will continue supporting sharing `ResourceClaims` among Pods within an

Reviewer 13: For scope management it makes sense this is out-of-scope for this KEP and for 1.37 in general, but we may address it in #5729 or a follow-up KEP if the use cases warrant it. cc @nojnhuh @andreyvelich

Reviewer 5: It would be great to discuss how `ResourceClaims` will work with CompositePodGroups as part of KEP-5729

	// The maximum number of templates is 8. This field is immutable.
	//
	// +optional
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=name
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:listType=map
	// +k8s:listMapKey=name
	// +k8s:maxItems=8
	// +k8s:immutable
	PodGroupTemplates []PodGroupTemplate
}
```

Policy- and constraints-related fields were omitted from the template definition
for brevity and clarity - we will discuss them in detail in the deep dive
section about the `CompositePodGroup` below. These fields have matching
structure and semantics as the fields in `CompositePodGroupTemplate` and their
values are supposed to be copied from the template on the `CompositePodGroup`
creation.

### Changes to the `PodGroup` API

There are two changes to the `PodGroup` spec:

- `PodGroupTemplateRef` field gets replaced with an optional `WorkloadRef` that
  contains a reference to the `Workload` together with a name of a template
  within that `Workload` object.
- New field called `ParentCompositePodGroupName` is added which denotes a name
  of an optional parent `CompositePodGroup` object.

```go
// PodGroupSpec defines the desired state of a PodGroup.
type PodGroupSpec struct {
	// ... existing fields ...

> 	// WorkloadRef references an optional PodGroup template within the Workload

Reviewer 8: Workload reference is optional, but shouldn't we expect consistency if it was used in one of the runtime objects?

Reviewer 3: Let's discuss this during the API review. When it comes to validation of the runtime tree, this would be part of beta, not alpha, anyway.

   This unified representation significantly reduces code and interface
   duplication, allowing scheduling plugins to process all hierarchy levels
   uniformly.
2. **Scheduling Queue Support for CPGs:** The core scheduling queue is extended
   to natively support root `CompositePodGroups` (CPGs without a parent
   reference) and standalone `PodGroups` as the sole root scheduling units
   enqueued in the scheduling queue. To preserve this root-only queue
   property in the presence of unsynchronized object arrivals (e.g. a member
   pod arriving before its parent PG/CPG object is created/observed):
   * Unobserved groups are tracked in a dedicated `unschedulablePodGroups`
     structure and only moved into the active scheduling queue when the root of
     their hierarchy (having no parent reference) is successfully observed and
     cached.
   * Member pods belonging to any nested child groups inside an unobserved
     hierarchy are placed and held inside the queue's `pendingPodGroupMembers`
     cache. These pods are blocked from active scheduling passes and only
     promoted when their full hierarchy, including the root CPG, is successfully

>      observed and enqueued.

Reviewer 11: What if we have an observed hierarchy (and enqueued to activeQ), but a new nested PodGroup and its pod are created? Where will the member pods be put when their PodGroup is not yet observed?

Reviewer 3: I think they need to go to `pendingPodGroupMembers`. If we haven't observed the `PodGroup` yet, we don't know which hierarchy tree it belongs to. Once we observe the PG, we'll need to atomically attach it to the hierarchy. Do you envision any problems with that?

Reviewer 11: I envisioned some problems (forgot what precisely), but reading you explanation, I think it should work correctly.

3. **`PreEnqueue` Extension Point:** Currently, this extension point is
   defined strictly at the individual `Pod` level. We introduce/add support
   for `PreEnqueue` at the `PodGroupInfo` level (operating on CPG/PG groups) to
   recursively verify if the tree has enough active members to schedule before

>    enqueuing.

Reviewer 11: I think adding a (Composite)PodGroup-level PreEnqueue would also require adding a support for (Composite)PodGroup-level queueing hints (to be able to react only on the relevant events). This will make it even harder to deliver in v1.37, making the Pod-level PreEnqueue a better choice for alpha.

Reviewer 3: That's a fair point, we should go with whatever is easier to implement in alpha. Updated.

   finalize on Beta).*
4. **`PlacementFeasible` Extension Point:** Currently, this extension point
   exists at the `PodGroup` level (introduced in [PR #138643](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/138643)).
   We extend this existing extension point under our polymorphic `PodGroupInfo`
   representation to support the validation of hierarchical constraints at the
   `CompositePodGroup` level.
5. **`Permit` Extension Point:** Currently, the `Permit` extension point is
   defined strictly at the `Pod` level, where flat gang scheduling blocks member
   pods until `minCount` pods are scheduled. Under this KEP, we do not introduce
   a new group-level extension point. Instead, we extend the implementation of
   the existing Pod-level `Permit` plugin: when an individual member pod is
   evaluated, the plugin climbs its group hierarchy up to the root group and
   traverses the entire tree structure to verify that all constraints are
   satisfied before releasing waiting pods for binding. We will re-evaluate in
   Beta whether this additional `Permit`-level verification pass is strictly
   required long-term, but include it as a prerequisite under Alpha to maintain

>    consistency and correctness.

Reviewer 11: +1, probably we don't need the Permit at all for gang scheduling (even non-CPG), but I still need to evaluate that

> search depth or bounded branches) that optimize overall scheduling success
> rates.

###### In-memory simulation state revert across the recursion stack

In the existing flat gang scheduling implementation,
`podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` is fully self-contained. When a member
pod is assumed, a `revertFn` is registered and executed via `defer` upon
function exit, restoring the `nodeInfoSnapshot` to its pre-execution state.

Under a nested `CompositePodGroup` hierarchy, deferred local reverts on
function exit would prematurely clear assumed pod allocations of a
successfully simulated child group (e.g. `PG-1`) before its sibling (e.g.
`PG-2`) is evaluated. Sibling groups would fail to see the consumed capacity
in the memory snapshot, leading to resource over-commitments and deadlocks.

To resolve this, the recursive algorithm does not defer execution of the
revert closures locally. Instead, as each child group runs its in-memory
simulation, the registered `revertFn` closures are returned and accumulated
(`[]revertFn`) up the recursion stack to the root CPG. Upon exit from the
root-level `podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` execution pass, the

> accumulated revert closures are always executed all-at-once, cleanly

Reviewer 11: You can add that the reverts should be executed in the reversed order, so the last revertFn should be called first (that's how it currently works using a `defer` and I think snapshot needs that correct order).

Reviewer 3: Done.

  active cycle, commits the minimal gang, and lets extra pending member pods
  trigger separate, subsequent scheduling cycles (running in greedy mode) to
  place the remaining pods. This approach reduces scheduling latency under single
  passes and mitigates Head-of-Line (HoL) queue blocking by allowing
  higher-priority workloads to interleave and schedule in between the separate
  greedy passes. A potential drawback is that cycle mode is not a one-off
  transition from non-greedy to greedy. If active member pods are deleted (e.g. due to
  node failures) and cause the CPG tree to drop below its
  `minGroupCount` threshold, the scheduling policy is no longer satisfied. The
  scheduler must then dynamically oscillate the cycle mode back to non-greedy
  to re-secure the minimal gang. Coordinating this behavior
  across separate, decoupled scheduling passes in the queue introduces
  complexity in the code.

###### Handling new pods for scheduled hierarchies
If new member pods belong to an already scheduled `CompositePodGroup` tree (e.g.,
due to a controller scaling up), they pop from the queue and trigger the

> standard recursive scheduling algorithm starting at the root CPG level. The CPG

Reviewer 11: You can clarify that the in the queue should always contain only the roots (not the member pods or subtrees), even for the new pods handling.

Reviewer 3: Clarified.

```go
// WorkloadReference references the Workload object together with the template
// that was used to create a particular PodGroup or CompositePodGroup.
type WorkloadReference struct {
	// WorkloadName is the name of the Workload object that contains a template
	// that was used when creating a pod group or a composite pod group. It must
	// be a DNS name.
	// This field is immutable.
	// This field is required.
	//
	// +required
	// +k8s:required
	// +k8s:immutable
	// +k8s:format=k8s-long-name
	WorkloadName string

	// TemplateName is the name of a template within the Workload object that
	// was used to create a pod group or a composite pod group. It must be a DNS label.
	// This field is immutable.
	// This field is required.
	//
	// +required
	// +k8s:required
	// +k8s:immutable
	// +k8s:format=k8s-short-name
	TemplateName string
}
```

#### Standalone `PodGroup` objects

In [KEP-4671], we introduced a notion of standalone `PodGroups` which are
`PodGroup` objects that can be created without a matching `Workload` object and
their workload reference is hence nil.

This proposal wants to preserve this possibility but limit the use of it to the

> flat workloads exclusively. In other words, `PodGroup` objects with a non-nil

Reviewer 8: I guess this requirement can be relaxed at some point, but I wonder what is the reason (benefit) behind it?

Reviewer 3: The `Workload` object helps with cross-validation of multiple CPG/PG objects. It also describes the user intent, so we can verify that the runtime representation matches it.

	Topology []TopologyConstraint
}
```

Despite having a separate structure storing the constraints for the
`CompositePodGroup` API, we will reuse the `TopologyConstraint` struct that is
already used in the `PodGroupSchedulingConstraints` type.

When scheduler attempts to schedule a hierarchy of groups that specifies
topological constraints on multiple levels, these constraints will be resolved
in a top-down manner. This means that such constraints should be ordered from
least constrictive ones to to the ones defining the smallest topology domains.

##### Disruption mode, priority class name and priority

The idea of disruption mode generalizes naturally to the `CompositePodGroup`
API:

```go
// DisruptionMode defines how individual entities within a composite pod group can be disrupted.
// Exactly one mode must be set.
// +union
type CompositeDisruptionMode struct {
	// Single specifies that children can be disrupted independently from each other.
	//
	// +optional
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:unionMember
	Single *SingleCompositeDisruptionMode

	// All specifies that all children can only be disrupted together.
	//
	// +optional
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:unionMember

> 	All *AllCompositeDisruptionMode

Reviewer 8: Maybe `AllGroupDisruptionMode` to make it consistent with other cases were we inject `Group` (not `Composite`) to disambiguate?

Reviewer 3: That's a reasonable suggestion. I'll add it to the naming alternatives.

Reviewer 3: Done.

already embedded in the API snippets in paragraphs above.

#### `Workload`

`Workload` object now contains a hierarchy of templates that could have a large
depth. While some workloads might have convoluted hierarchy, we do not want to
allow arbitrarily large tree structures. We start with supporting the depth of
group template hierarchy of up to 4 levels. This should suffice for all use
cases that we are aware of today - if future proves otherwise, however, we could
revisit this limit and bump it up further.

Apart from that, we also need to validate uniqueness of template names within
the whole template hierarchy in a single `Workload` object - otherwise, template
references would be ambiguous.

To verify both of these conditions, we will add a new hand-written validation that
targets new `Workload` objects and performs both of these checks.

#### Group hierarchy

Because `Workload` API embeds the whole template hierarchy, we can statically
verify its depth in kube-apiserver. Unfortunately, we cannot perform analogous
checks for the group hierarchy in a way that completely eliminates race
conditions - due to the eventually consistent nature of Kubernetes, cross-object

> validation can be performed only in a best-effort manner.

Reviewer 8: Shall we even attempt to validate group objects in api-server if it's going to produce false-positive findings? Cannot we leave it entirely for runtime checks in the scheduler?

Reviewer 3: Yes, that's the plan for the runtime hierarchy.

For Workload, given it's a single API object, we can do validation in api-server.

That said, a misbehaving controller might create a `Workload` object and a set
of group objects that form a hierarchy which is not reflected in that
`Workload`. In such case, the controller can create a group hierarchy that:

- Is deeper than allowed,
- Contains a cyclical parent reference relationship,
- References to more than a single `Workload`.

Each of these should be treated as a failure mode since it is essentially a
manifestation of the API misuse. Because of that we will make kube-scheduler
responsible for discovering them in runtime. Specifically, if scheduler notices
any of these modes, it will update the status of all the groups within the group
hierarchy accordingly (i.e. deeming those groups invalid) and will not proceed
to scheduling it at all.

### Changes in kube-scheduler

#### Multi-level gang scheduling

Below we describe the high-level changes in `kube-scheduler` required to
support multi-level gang scheduling.

##### Prerequisites
To enable multi-level gang scheduling, we must generalize internal data
structures, extend the core scheduling queue, and adapt plugin extension
points:

> 1. **Polymorphic `PodGroupInfo` Generalization:** In the internal scheduler

Reviewer 8: Since pod groups and composite groups are expected to have semantical differences, are we going to consider the subset of equivalent concepts (like `GangSchedulingPolicy`/`GangGroupSchedulingPolicy` or `AllDisruptionMode`/`AllGroupDisruptionMode`)?

Shall we map them somehow to a common implementation?
How are we going to handle implementation differences then?

Reviewer 3: For the internal code representation (unlike the API), we should apply the YAGNI principle and keep them identical until actual semantic differences emerge, since code is much easier to refactor later.

The main benefit of reusing `PodGroupInfo` and making it polymorphic is that it's already integrated into extension points like `ScorePlacement` and `PlacementFeasible`. This keeps the interfaces unchanged, requiring only underlying implementation updates to support both PG and CPG cases.

I'll document this in KEP vs that we also need to make the `QueuedEntityInfo` (that @macsko  introduced in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/138567) polymorphic to support CPG in scheduler queue.

   the existing Pod-level `Permit` plugin: when an individual member pod is
   evaluated, the plugin climbs its group hierarchy up to the root group and
   traverses the entire tree structure to verify that all constraints are
   satisfied before releasing waiting pods for binding. We will re-evaluate in
   Beta whether this additional `Permit`-level verification pass is strictly
   required long-term, but include it as a prerequisite under Alpha to maintain
   consistency and correctness.

##### GangScheduling Plugin Changes

1. **`PreEnqueue`:**
   Executed strictly on the root node (represented by a root `PodGroupInfo`
   object) of the popped hierarchy. It recursively verifies that the subtree
   contains the required minimum quantities:
   * **For a leaf `PodGroup`:** Verifies if the group is `admissible` (total
     pending or running member pods in the cluster $\ge$ `minCount`).
   * **For a `CompositePodGroup`:** Verifies that the number of `admissible`
     child groups in its subtree $\ge$ `minGroupCount`.
   * If the root-level check fails, the scheduling unit is rejected and remains
     in the unschedulable queue.

2. **`PlacementFeasible`:**

>    Executed for each `PodGroupInfo` node in the popped hierarchy tree under the

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
   Executed for each `PodGroupInfo` node in the popped hierarchy tree as a part of the
```

Reviewer 3: Done.

   `Permit` plugin to climb the parent group references and traverse the tree
   structure to verify constraints before releasing member pods for final
   binding:
   * **If the Pod belongs to a standalone group (not part of a hierarchy):**
     We do not introduce any changes. The plugin relies on the pre-existing
     behavior to hold member pods in a waiting state and release them once
     the group's `minCount` member pods are successfully scheduled.
   * **If the Pod belongs to a group hierarchy tree (nested under a parent
     CPG):**
     We override the flat group-level checks. When a member pod is evaluated,
     the plugin climbs parent references up to the root CPG ancestor. It
     traverses the entire hierarchy tree structure in the permit cache
     (ensuring all nested child groups satisfy parent `minGroupCount` and
     child `minCount` thresholds) starting at this root level, releasing the
     waiting member pods for final binding only when the entire tree's
     constraints are satisfied.

##### Recursive Scheduling Cycle Execution
In `schedule_one_podgroup.go`, the scheduler processes a popped root unit (a root

> `PodGroupInfo`) by running the recursive **`podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm`**

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
`PodGroupInfo`) by running **`groupRecursiveSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm`**, which is the recursive version of **`podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm`**
```

Reviewer 3: Done

  pods that failed scheduling are marked as `Unschedulable` and return to the
  scheduling queue, which subsequently places the entire root CPG hierarchy
  back into the queue for re-evaluation.
* **If the root-level scheduling policy is not satisfied:** If the recursive
  in-memory simulation fails to schedule at least `minGroupCount` child groups
  under a CPG tree, no pod bindings are committed in this pass.
  The scheduler then triggers the workload preemption at the root CPG level.
* **During subsequent cycles:** In subsequent scheduling cycles, when the CPG
  with pending extra or newly scaled member pods pop from the queue, the
  standard recursive scheduling algorithm is executed for the root CPG
  hierarchy (where these pending pods are evaluated under greedy rules along
  with the active tree). If the recursive algorithm fails to place any of
  these pending member pods, the scheduler triggers the preemption engine at
  the root CPG level to clear capacity.

In summary, workload preemption is triggered at the root CPG level if and only
if: the CPG root scheduling policy is not satisfied, OR the policy is

> satisfied but there are unschedulable pods and none of them successfully

Reviewer 6: I think this summary is introducing more confusion than clarity. The second part of a summary does not explain that we are talking about the subsequent cycle and that those unschedulable pods are extra or new pods. Tbh, I would just remove this summary and rely on the full explanation above..

Reviewer 3: Ah, fair. Fixed. Thanks!

scheduled.

###### Inadmissible child groups
A root `CompositePodGroup` might successfully pass the `PreEnqueue` queue filter,
yet contain child groups that are currently inadmissible (e.g. they do not
have enough active member pods in the cluster queue to reach their `minCount`).
For example, consider a root CPG (`minGroupCount=3`) containing four nested child
groups, where the first three child groups are admissible, but the fourth `PG-4`
has only 2 pending pods out of its `minCount=5`.

In this situation, evaluating the inadmissible child groups during the recursive
scheduling cycle is futile: they cannot schedule, and if not handled correctly,

> they will trigger a costly preemption which will also not succeed.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
they will trigger a costly preemption evaluation which will not be effective anyway.
```

Reviewer 3: Done.

groups:
* **Alpha:** Futile cycles are not skipped in the Alpha phase (admissibility
  checks on nested children are not executed).
* **Beta:** We will implement branch-skipping heuristics by extending the
  `PlacementFeasible` checker to run checks *before* in-memory scheduling of
  child placements (in addition to after each child group evaluation). If a
  `PodGroupInfo` fails its minimum count requirements prior to evaluation
  (e.g. a PG has only 2 member pods out of its `minCount=5`), the
  pre-simulation `PlacementFeasible` checker returns
  `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable` early, bypassing any child pod placements and
  avoiding the costly preemption entirely.

  Additionally, for already active (scheduled) `CompositePodGroup` trees under
  subsequent scale-up passes, the preemption triggering rules will be modified
  in Beta to distinguish between resource starvation and child group
  admissibility. Specifically, if a child group has satisfied its `minCount`
  minimum constraint but has pending optional pods (e.g. has scheduled 10 out
  of required 10 pods, but has 2 additional member pods unplaced due to cluster

>   capacity saturation), the scheduler **will** trigger preemption at the root

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
  capacity saturation), the scheduler **will** attempt preemption at the root
```

Reviewer 3: Done.

>   CPG level to clear capacity. Conversely, if a child group failed placement

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
  CPG level to release capacity. Conversely, if a child group failed placement
```

Reviewer 3: Done.

  simply because it is inadmissible (e.g. has only 2 active member pods out of
  its `minCount=5` in the cluster), the scheduler **will bypass** preemption
  entirely, as evicting victim pods can never resolve the child group's
  missing members.

###### Resource stealing under greedy evaluation
When a CPG is evaluated, child groups are processed sequentially in their
pre-sorted order. Under the greedy evaluation, child groups try to
schedule as many member pods as possible (potentially exceeding their `minCount`
requirements).

This can lead to **resource stealing** in capacity-constrained clusters: an
early, greedy child group consumes all available slots, preventing a sibling
child group from reaching its `minCount` and causing the entire root CPG gang
to fail scheduling.

For the **Alpha** phase, we do not optimize or solve this resource stealing
challenge for complex, constrained layouts. Instead, we focus on ensuring that
the most common and typical use-cases work out-of-the-box: scenarios
where the minimum constraints equal the actual size (`minCount = actualCount`
and `minGroupCount` equals the total child group count). Under this standard

> baseline, optional this problem doesn't exist.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
and `minGroupCount` equals the total child group count). In cases the actualCount > minCount, the algorithm will stop after scheduling minCount number of children.
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed.

> For the **Beta** release, we will evaluate two distinct alternatives to solve

Reviewer 8: Another possible approach would be to schedule as many children as possible, but block resource only for children <minCount. The ones >minCount would have to be re-assed in the second pass (in a similar process to reprieve).

Reviewer 3: Yeah, but then we would process the "optional" pods twice, wouldn't we?

Reviewer 8: It would be only a reprieve-like process, to check whether the place they were scheduled is still available. Since we are enumerating options, I think it's worth adding, which doesn't mean we need to follow it (a single run with reprieve).

  already successfully scheduled and remains active in the cluster).
* The individual member pods fail scheduling and trigger the preemption
  engine at the root CPG level.

##### Suboptimal scheduling decisions

As already mentioned, optimal multi-level scheduling is an NP-hard computational
problem underneath, so solving it at a large scale is infeasible.
`kube-scheduler` mitigates this through operating on a single Pod at a time
while making scheduling decisions for a whole group hierarchy. This is
essentially a heuristic that relaxes the requirement for global optimum in
exchange for drastically reduced computational complexity.

In particular, this implies that `kube-scheduler` might fail to find a placement
for a multi-level gang even despite the sufficiency of resources in the cluster.
This can be a side effect of suboptimal placement decisions that were made for
individual Pods, e.g. due to the sequence in which placement for individual Pods
of a gang was established. This problem already exists in case of scheduling a
heterogeneous `PodGroup` gang but it might manifest itself to a larger degree.

> For Beta, we will decide whether or not we need additional heuristics to

Reviewer 8: I'd state clearly that optimizing scheduling decisions is completely optional and won't block beta promotion. The baseline for this enhancement is to prevent scheduling workloads which does not meet its scheduling criteria and not behave worse than existing scheduler behavior both in terms of capability to find a placement and performance.

Most of the attempts to optimize placement will come with a cost of performance degradation due to the NP-complete nature of the scheduling problem.

Reviewer 11: We could at least make the users aware of such suboptimal decisions

Reviewer 3: Added a note about documenting that.

increase the chance of getting a group hierarchy scheduled. That said,
regardless of what we eventually do, we will not overcome the problem's
NP-hardness with heuristics.

#### Integration with workload-aware preemption

If a root `PodGroupInfo` (representing a root CPG or standalone PG) is

> unschedulable and triggers preemption (Case 2 and Case 4 in

Reviewer 6: After the latest update you have only 3 cases in #preemption-triggering-rules

Reviewer 3: Good catch, done. Thanks!

> # KEP-6012: CompositePodGroup API

Reviewer 3: Note for reviewers. 

Given the massive scope of KEP-6012, to minimize the risk of stalling the entire proposal and ensure that we deliver incremental value safely, we would introduce a phased implementation plan. Breaking down this feature into logical stages will allow for more focused reviews and de-risk the graduation process:

1. **Phase 1: Core CompositePodGroup API & Multi-Level Gang Scheduling**
   * **Scope:** Introduction of the core `CompositePodGroup` API and gang scheduling policy specs (excluding topology constraints and disruption modes).
   * **Implementation:** Foundational queue extensions in `kube-scheduler` (polymorphic `PodGroupInfo` representations, core queue changes) and the implementation of the core recursive scheduling loop for multi-level gang scheduling.

2. **Phase 2: Multi-Level Topology-Aware Scheduling (TAS)**
   * **Scope:** API support for multi-level topology constraints.
   * **Implementation:** The recursive topology placement and scoring algorithm.

3. **Phase 3: Multi-Level Workload-Aware Preemption (WAP)**
   * **Scope:** API support for hierarchical disruption modes (e.g., `Single` vs `All`).
   * **Implementation:** Implementation of multi-level WAP

**Execution Strategy:**
We will focus on **Phase 1** as our primary objective to lay down the core infrastructure. Development on **Phase 2** and **Phase 3** can proceed in parallel once the Phase 1 foundations are firmly established.

Reviewer 8: Can you move that into PR description (note for reviewers)?

Reviewer 3: Done.

disruption policies without requiring API schema redesigns.

## Design Details

### API overview

We introduce the `CompositePodGroup` API as the main building block for
representing multi-level, hierarchical workloads. As the naming suggests, this
API acts as a composition of one-or-more `PodGroup` and `CompositePodGroup`
objects. In other words, hierarchical workloads can be now expressed as a tree
of groups where `CompositePodGroup` objects correspond to non-leaf nodes and
`PodGroup` objects correspond to leaf nodes. To maintain the tree structure,
groups will have an optional reference to the parent group which will be empty
for the root group. It is worth noting that in this model, only a
`CompositePodGroup` can be a parent to other groups.

Every `CompositePodGroup` object defines scheduling policies and constraints
that apply to the workload portion enclosed in the subtree that has this
`CompositePodGroup` object as its root. We will discuss precise meaning of those
policies and constraints in the following subsections.

`Workload` API, which continues to represent the static policy configuration of
a true workload, starts to contain the definition of templates for the

> `CompositePodGroup` objects, similar to how it already did so for the `Podgroup`

Reviewer 12: typo：
```suggestion
`CompositePodGroup` objects, similar to how it already did so for the `PodGroup`
```

objects. To clearly reflect the hierarchical nature of a workload, templates
themselves are evolved into a tree-like structure.

For illustration, here is a diagram depicting a sample three-level group
hierarchy consisting of `CompositePodGroup` and `PodGroup` objects with the
references to the templates within the matching `Workload` object:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Instances ["<b>Runtime groups</b>"]
        RootCPG["CompositePodGroup:<br/>job-root"]

        subgraph Branch1 [" "]
            ChildCPG1["CompositePodGroup: replica-0"]
            PG1["PodGroup: workers-0"]
            PG2["PodGroup: driver-0"]
            ChildCPG1 <--> PG1
            ChildCPG1 <--> PG2
        end

        subgraph Branch2 [" "]
            ChildCPG2["CompositePodGroup: replica-1"]

>             PG3["PodGroup: worker-1"]

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
            PG3["PodGroup: workers-1"]
```

	// CompositePodGroupTemplates is the list of templates for children CompositePodGroups.
	// The maximum number of templates is 8. This field is immutable.
	//
	// +optional
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=name
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:listType=map
	// +k8s:listMapKey=name
	// +k8s:maxItems=8
	// +k8s:immutable
	CompositePodGroupTemplates []CompositePodGroupTemplate

	// PodGroupTemplates is the list of templates for children PodGroups.
	// The maximum number of templates is 8. This field is immutable.
	//
	// +optional
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=name
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:listType=map
	// +k8s:listMapKey=name
	// +k8s:maxItems=8
	// +k8s:immutable
	PodGroupTemplates []PodGroupTemplate
}
```

Policy- and constraints-related fields were omitted from the template definition
for brevity and clarity - we will discuss them in detail in the deep dive
section about the `CompositePodGroup` below. These fields have matching
structure and semantics as the fields in `CompositePodGroupTemplate` and their
values are supposed to be copied from the template on the `CompositePodGroup`
creation.

### Changes to the `PodGroup` API

There are two changes to the `PodGroup` spec:

> - `PodGroupTemplateRef` field gets replaced with an optional `WorkloadRef` that

Reviewer 13: Is the plan still to take PodGroup to beta? Presumably v1beta1 will use this new field instead of the older one?

Reviewer 3: Yes, and that is the plan. 

@dom4ha have we done this already in v1alpha3 (which we'll be promoting to beta)?

Reviewer 2: It didn't yet happen.
@dom4ha - can you please open a follow-up PR to change this?

Reviewer 8: I will take care of it.

	//
	// +optional
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:unionMember
	Basic *BasicGroupSchedulingPolicy

	// Gang specifies that the groups of this composite group should be scheduled using
	// all-or-nothing semantics.
	//
	// +optional
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:unionMember
	Gang *GangGroupSchedulingPolicy
}

// BasicGroupSchedulingPolicy indicates that the groups belonging to the composite group
// should be scheduled independently.
type BasicGroupSchedulingPolicy struct {
	// This is intentionally empty. Its presence indicates that the basic
	// scheduling policy should be applied. In the future, new fields may appear,
	// describing such constraints on a composite pod group level without
	// "all or nothing" (gang) scheduling.
}

// GangGroupSchedulingPolicy indicates that the groups belonging to the composite group
// should be scheduled using all-or-nothing semantics.
type GangGroupSchedulingPolicy struct {
	// MinGroupCount is the minimum number of child groups that must be schedulable
	// or scheduled at the same time for the scheduler to admit the entire group.
	// It must be a positive integer.
	//
	// +optional
	// +k8s:required
	// +k8s:minimum=1

> 	MinGroupCount int32

Reviewer 12: Should we mention that this is immutable in alpha as https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6017/changes#r3319411408?

Remove the `+optional` if I understand correctly.

Reviewer 3: Good catch, this should be immutable. Done.

	//
	// +optional
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:unionMember
	All *AllCompositeDisruptionMode
}

// SingleCompositeDisruptionMode means that individual children of a CompositePodGroup
// can be disrupted or preempted independently.
type SingleCompositeDisruptionMode struct {
	// This is intentionally empty.
}

// AllCompositeDisruptionMode means that children of a CompositePodGroup can only be
// disrupted or preempted together.
type AllCompositeDisruptionMode struct {
	// This is intentionally empty.
}
```

The nesting of scheduling groups with potentially differing `DisruptionModes` at separate
levels of the hierarchy introduces support for complex disruption semantics. 

However, not all hierarchical disruption configurations represent semantically clear runtime
states. For example, if a parent `CompositePodGroup` is configured with the `All` disruption
mode (requiring the entire subtree to be preempted or disrupted as a single atomic unit) but
contains child groups configured with the `Single` disruption mode (allowing their
individual elements to be preempted independently), the expected behavior is highly
ambiguous. 

> To ensure deterministic preemption and eviction behavior, the API will enforce the following

Reviewer 13: I don't think we can enforce this at admission time, since the various CompositePodGroups and PodGroups are independent resources.

Reviewer 3: Correct, but please note that in alpha, this restriction will be enforced only on the Workload API. Since it is a single object (we'll be verifying templates within it), we can do this relatively easily in API validation.

In beta, we'll introduce runtime validation in kube-scheduler for the runtime hierarchy.

future releases once concrete production use-cases and community feedback are established.

The `Priority` and the `PriorityClassName` fields are resolved in the exact same
way as they already are for Pods and `PodGroups` - specifically, the `Priority`
admission controller gets extended to additionally support the
`CompositePodGroup` API.

For the **Alpha** release, we enforce a strict single-priority constraint: all
member groups and pods within a single group hierarchy tree **must share the exact
same priority and PriorityClassName**. Support for differing group-level
priorities under basic scheduling policies will be explored for the **Beta**
release.

The value of the `Priority` field is being used in the following two contexts:

- `CompositePodGroup` objects without a parent reference are being put in the
  scheduling queue. Their priority is taken into account by the PrioritySort
  plugin when determining the importance of scheduling unit.
- When running preemption to fit a `CompositePodGroup` in the cluster, only
  lower priority preemption units could be selected as prospective victims. This

>   includes other `CompositePodGroup` victims with the `All` disruption mode.

Reviewer 2: nit: 
... victims with the `All` disruption mode that don't have parent with `All` disruption mode.

or sth along those lines

Otherwise, we need to take their parent as a victim.

Reviewer 3: Good catch! Since this section is focused strictly on describing how the `Priority` field is used, detailing the hierarchical `All` preemption grouping logic here was indeed redundant and a bit confusing. 
I've simplified the text in this section to focus purely on the priority aspect. The detailed hierarchical victim grouping logic remains fully documented under the #### Integration with workload-aware preemption section.

#### Status

Analogous to `PodGroupStatus`, `CompositePodGroupStatus` represents the observed state of a `CompositePodGroup`.

```go
// CompositePodGroupStatus represents information about the status of a composite pod group.
type CompositePodGroupStatus struct {
	// Conditions represent the latest observations of the CompositePodGroup's state.
	//
	// Known condition types:
	// - "CompositePodGroupInitiallyScheduled": Indicates whether the overall scheduling requirement
	//   for the subtree under this CompositePodGroup has been satisfied. Once this condition
	//   transitions to True, it serves as a terminal state and will never revert to False,
	//   even if pods are subsequently deleted and group constraints are no longer met.
	// - "DisruptionTarget": Indicates whether the CompositePodGroup is about to be terminated
	//   due to disruption such as preemption.
	//

> 	// Known reasons for the CompositePodGroupScheduled condition:

Reviewer 12: Does this mean CompositePodGroupInitiallyScheduled above(line 909)？

Reviewer 3: Good catch, done!

#### Group hierarchy

Because `Workload` API embeds the whole template hierarchy, we can statically
verify its depth in kube-apiserver. Unfortunately, we cannot perform analogous
checks for the group hierarchy in a way that completely eliminates race
conditions - due to the eventually consistent nature of Kubernetes, cross-object
validation can be performed only in a best-effort manner.

That said, a misbehaving controller might create a `Workload` object and a set
of group objects that form a hierarchy which is not reflected in that
`Workload`. In such case, the controller can create a group hierarchy that:

- Is deeper than allowed,
- Contains a cyclical parent reference relationship,
- References to more than a single `Workload`.

Each of these should be treated as a failure mode since it is essentially a
manifestation of the API misuse. Because of that we will make kube-scheduler
responsible for discovering them in runtime. Specifically, if scheduler notices
any of these modes, it will update the status of all the groups within the group
hierarchy accordingly (i.e. deeming those groups invalid) and will not proceed
to scheduling it at all.

##### Runtime validation in Beta

> A complete implementation of runtime hierarchy validation—including verifying that the group tree matches the definition in the corresponding `Workload` object—will be tackled in the **Beta** release. While the high-level goals are established, the detailed design requires careful consideration to guarantee consistent decisions and prevent race conditions.

Reviewer 11: Please split the long lines in this section into shorter ones as in the rest of the KEP

> A complete implementation of runtime hierarchy validation—including verifying that the group tree matches the definition in the corresponding `Workload` object—will be tackled in the **Beta** release. While the high-level goals are established, the detailed design requires careful consideration to guarantee consistent decisions and prevent race conditions.

Reviewer 2: nit: can you please split the lines in this section?

The initial outline and key challenges to address for the Beta design include:

> *   **Watching `Workload` objects:** To validate whether the runtime group tree matches the actual `Workload`-defined tree, the scheduler will potentially need to list and watch `Workload` objects. Since the number of distinct active workloads in a cluster is relatively small and their objects are lightweight, introducing this watch is expected to have a negligible impact on the scheduler's scalability.

Reviewer 2: The number of Workload objects isn't necessarily small.

The key point is that it should be bounded by the number of pods (typically much much lower) and those objects are generally static (so the churn related to them is very low).

Reviewer 3: Done.

   polymorphically represent both leaf `PodGroups` and `CompositePodGroups`.
   This unified representation significantly reduces code and interface
   duplication, allowing scheduling plugins to process all hierarchy levels
   uniformly.
2. **Scheduling Queue Support for CPGs:** The core scheduling queue is
   extended to natively support root `CompositePodGroups` (CPGs without a
   parent reference) and standalone `PodGroups` as the sole root scheduling
   units. To support this, the `QueuedEntityInfo` wrapper struct (introduced
   in [PR #138567](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/138567)) is
   generalized polymorphically to wrap either a standalone Pod, a standalone
   `PodGroupInfo`, or a nested parent `CompositePodGroup` hierarchy, allowing
   the queue to sort and pop them uniformly. To preserve this root-only
   queue property in the presence of unsynchronized object arrivals:
   * Unobserved groups are tracked in a dedicated `unschedulablePodGroups`
     structure and only moved into the active scheduling queue when the root of
     their hierarchy (having no parent reference) is successfully observed and

>      cached.

Reviewer: Do we need a dedicated unschedulablePodGroups? Can we reuse the existing unschedQ with PreEnqueue and QHint? like, we keep a root CPG in unschedQ by blocking it by PreEnqueue and QHint for CPG/Added events will retry to reenqueue the root CPG to activeQ (and if there is still a non-existing child, PreEnqueue blocks it again)

Reviewer 3: The primary reason we cannot simply leverage the existing `unschedQ` with `PreEnqueue` and `QHints` for unresolved hierarchies comes down to the asynchronous arrival of API objects and how we resolve the hierarchy root.

Consider a scenario where a a leaf `PodGroup PG-X` arrives refernecing a parent `CompositePodGroup CPG-1`, but **`CPG-1` has not yet been observed by the scheduler**. Then:

1. **We do not have the root object in cache:** We cannot enqueue `CPG-1` (even as a blocked entity in `unschedQ`) because the object has not yet been observed or created in the scheduler's local cache. Moreover, we can't just create a "mock" or placeholder entry for `CPG-1` to put into `unschedQ`. At this point, without having observed `CPG-1`, the scheduler has no way of knowing if `CPG-1` is actually the root of the hierarchy, or if it has a parent reference pointing to some `CPG-2` (which would make `CPG-2` the actual root scheduling unit). 
3. **Preserving the root-only queue property:** The scheduling queue is designed to pop and process only fully-formed, root-level scheduling units. Allowing partially observed, broken hierarchies into the main queue structures like `unschedQ` would violate this invariant, forcing the queue to handle incomplete trees and adding significant complexity to sorting, merging and popping logic.

Therefore, `unschedulablePodGroups` (together with `pendingPodGroupMembers`) acts as a temporary holding zone. It isolates these unresolved, partial hierarchies entirely from the scheduling queue pipeline until we successfully observe the true ancestor with no parent reference (the true root) and we can move the tree to the `activeQ`.

Does it make sense?

Reviewer 8: The `unschedulableEntities` were already introduced in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/138567, so it should be possible to adapt to CPGs by applying recursive checks. I hope we won't encounter any new issues there.

Reviewer 3: Yes, `unschedulableEntities` is a generalization of `unschedulablePods` based on `QueuedEntityInfo`. If we make `QueuedEntityInfo` polymorphic (supporting Pod, PodGroup, and CompositePodGroup), that should indeed be sufficient to handle CPGs in the main queue structures.

However, we will still independently need holding structures to buffer incoming members while their parent group/hierarchy is in-flight. That's why we're introducing `unschedulablePodGroups`. Actually, to make it consistent with the already existing `pendingPodGroupMembers`, I've renamed it to `pendingPodGroups`.

Reviewer: I don't understand why we cannot block such partially observed PG/CPG at PreEnqueue? We already introduced managing PG as a single entity inside queue.

Reviewer 3: Technically we could do that, but it would require getting rid of the "we keep only root objects in the queue" invariant. If we do that then we need a complex deduplication logic, as we could potentially have multiple objects representing the same CPG hierarchy inside the queue.

The assumption that we only keep roots in the queue simplifies the logic and mental model significantly, and I'd prefer to stick with it. The direct tradeoff of this approach is that we need a separate place to store objects for which the root is not yet known.

Reviewer 3: One additional observation: theoretically, we could keep the entire hierarchy in the queue and deduplicate (remove associated elements) when popping the first one.  However, this is exactly the approach we used for standard PodGroups before the queue natively supported them in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/138567. We explicitly refactored the queue to store only PG entities to avoid this. Moving away from the "root-only" invariant now would be an architectural step backward, as keeping only roots in the queue is the target state we already migrated to.

Reviewer 11: Storing non-root objects in `unschedulableEntities` would be difficult and unclear - a single schedulable entity (root CPG) would be then split into multiple subtrees, each tracked individually, until the root CPG arrives to the scheduler. Then, the scheduling queue would have to remove all such items from the `unschedulableEntities` (somehow locating them?) and merge them into one object. It would even happen when the root CPG is observed, but more pod(group)s arrive.

I like the idea of storing such incomplete pod(group)s in a separate structure in the scheduling queue. We could even abstract the `pendingPodGroupMembers` structure to also store any pending entities (i.e., pods, pod groups and CPGs) that have to wait for their parent to be observed.

Reviewer: ok, I am convinced about this one

   * Member pods belonging to any nested child groups inside an unobserved
     hierarchy are placed and held inside the queue's `pendingPodGroupMembers`
     cache. These pods are blocked from active scheduling passes and only

>      promoted when their full hierarchy, including the root CPG, is successfully

Reviewer: How to determine 'full hierarchy'? Let's say the hierarchy is root --> childA / childB, and the scheduler observes root --> childA only. How does the scheduler know it needs to wait for childB?

Reviewer 3: Good question. The term "full hierarchy" was misleading. I've updated the KEP text to focus strictly on the **root of the hierarchy** (a `PodGroup` or `CompositePodGroup` without a parent reference) to make this clear.

At runtime, it's impossible for the scheduler to know the full tree structure beforehand. It only requires the root object to be observed to initiate the scheduling attempt and then we leverage the PreEnqueue to ensure we only proceed with scheduling when the hierarchy is actually "admissible" (all `MinCounts` / `MinGroupCounts` are satisfied).

In your example, once the `root` is observed, it gets enqueued. However, if `root` requires `MinGroupCount=2` and `childB` is still unobserved, the `PreEnqueue` check will fail. The `root` hierarchy remains in the unschedulable queue until `childB` arrives and triggers a retry.

Hope the text update makes this clear.

Reviewer: ok, I understood and that makes sense

>      observed and enqueued.

Reviewer 11: Implementation detail, but we could probably have one structure (let's say `pendingEntities`) that will store any entity (Pod, PodGroup, CPG) that is waiting for its root/parent

   *(Note: Alternatively, one could introduce a group-level PreEnqueue
   extension point. However, this would require adding support for group-level
   queuing hints in the scheduler queue backend to react only to relevant
   events. This adds substantial complexity, making it too risky to deliver in
   the v1.37 milestone. We therefore select the Pod-level PreEnqueue as the
   preferred choice for Alpha, and will explore group-level abstractions in
   Beta).*
4. **`PlacementFeasible` Extension Point:** Currently, this extension point
   exists at the `PodGroup` level (introduced in [PR #138643](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/138643)).
   We extend this existing extension point under our polymorphic `PodGroupInfo`
   representation to support the validation of hierarchical constraints at the
   `CompositePodGroup` level.
5. **`Permit` Extension Point:** Currently, the `Permit` extension point is
   defined strictly at the `Pod` level, where flat gang scheduling blocks member
   pods until `minCount` pods are scheduled. Under this KEP, we do not introduce
   a new group-level extension point. Instead, we extend the implementation of

>    the existing Pod-level `Permit` plugin: when an individual member pod is

Reviewer 2: `Permit` is not a plugin - it's an extension point.

I'm assuming that you're talking about extending the implementation of the `Permit` implementation in GangScheduling plugin, right?
Or do you want to change something at the framework level?

[If the former is correct - why it is here, not in the GangScheduling plugin subsection below?]

Reviewer 3: Fair point. I rewrote this to focus on framework implications without going into implementation details which are in the next section.

   evaluated, the plugin climbs its group hierarchy up to the root group and
   traverses the entire tree structure to verify that all constraints are
   satisfied before releasing waiting pods for binding. We will re-evaluate in
   Beta whether this additional `Permit`-level verification pass is strictly
   required long-term, but include it as a prerequisite under Alpha to maintain
   consistency and correctness.

##### GangScheduling Plugin Changes

1. **`PreEnqueue`:**
   Executed at the Pod-level during the enqueue stage for each member pod of
   a popped hierarchy unit. The plugin climbs parent references up to the
   root CPG ancestor, traversing the tree to recursively verify that the
   subtree contains the required minimum quantities:
   * **For a leaf `PodGroup`:** Verifies if the group is `admissible`
     (total pending or running member pods in the cluster $\ge$ `minCount`).
   * **For a `CompositePodGroup`:** Verifies that the number of `admissible`
     child groups in its subtree $\ge$ `minGroupCount`.
   * If the admissibility check for the root CPG fails, the individual
     pod's enqueuing is rejected, and it remains inside the scheduling queue.

> 2. **`PlacementFeasible`:**

Reviewer: nit - can you briefly mention what you explained in "Resource stealing under greedy evaluation" here

Reviewer 3: Could you clarify if there is any specific detail you'd like to see added here?

Please note that in the next section (Recursive Scheduling Cycle Execution), when describing how the `PlacementFeasible` `Success` status is aggregated, I am explaining that this results in greedy behavior in alpha, and I link directly to the resource stealing section there. 

Personally, I think linking it there makes sense, while here we are just describing how `PlacementFeasible` itself will work (which is independent of how it will be later aggregated).

   Executed for each `PodGroupInfo` node in the popped hierarchy tree as a part
   of the `groupRecursiveSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` routine during in-memory
   simulation to determine if a group satisfies active member constraints.
   Under this KEP, we extend the existing `PlacementFeasible` checker
   implementation to support `PodGroupInfo` representing `CompositePodGroups`:
   * **For a leaf `PodGroup`:** We do not introduce any changes. The
     implementation relies on the pre-existing behavior, evaluating in-memory
     scheduled member pods and remaining pending member pods in the queue against
     `minCount` to return `Success`, `Unschedulable`, or
     `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable`.
   * **For a `CompositePodGroup`:** We evaluate the in-memory scheduled
     child groups and remaining admissible child groups against the parent's
     `minGroupCount` threshold:

>      - **`Success`:** Returned if in-memory scheduled child groups $\ge$

Reviewer 2: I suggest updating to what Maciek suggested in: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6017#discussion_r3317005561

Reviewer 3: Done.

   unschedulable queue.

##### Recursive Scheduling Cycle Execution
In `schedule_one_podgroup.go`, the scheduler processes a popped root unit (a root
`PodGroupInfo`) by running **`groupRecursiveSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm`**, which is
the recursive version of **`podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm`** routine.
Throughout this recursive simulation phase, all pod-to-node assignments
are tracked strictly **in memory** in the `nodeInfoSnapshot` as temporary state
before final binding:

1. **If the active node is a leaf `PodGroup`:** Runs the same logic as in the
   flat, single-level `podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` (simulating member
   pod placements in memory) and returns the status.
2. **If the active node is a `CompositePodGroup`:** Iterates through its nested
   child groups in their pre-sorted order, executing the recursive
   `groupRecursiveSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` sequentially. After in-memory scheduling
   each child group, the scheduler invokes the extended `PlacementFeasible`
   checker under the parent `PodGroupInfo` to evaluate the CPG's current
   status, triggering distinct branches based on the returned result:

>    * **`Unschedulable`:** The parent CPG constraints are not yet fully met (e.g.,

Reviewer 2: I suggest updating to what Maciek suggested in: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6017#discussion_r3317005561

Reviewer 3: Done.

function exit would prematurely clear assumed pod allocations of a
successfully simulated child group (e.g. `PG-1`) before its sibling (e.g.
`PG-2`) is evaluated. Sibling groups would fail to see the consumed capacity
in the memory snapshot, leading to resource over-commitments and deadlocks.

To resolve this, the recursive algorithm does not defer execution of the
revert closures locally. Instead, as each child group runs its in-memory
simulation, the registered `revertFn` closures are returned and accumulated
(`[]revertFn`) up the recursion stack to the root CPG. Upon exit from the
root-level `groupRecursiveSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` execution pass, the
accumulated revert closures are always executed all-at-once, cleanly
restoring the shared `nodeInfoSnapshot` to its pre-execution state before the
separate, asynchronous binding cycle triggers. To preserve the cache's
transactional integrity, these accumulated reverts must be executed in the
exact reverse order of their registration (matching how native deferred
execution operates), ensuring the last registered revert is called first to
cleanly roll back node allocations.

##### Scheduling sequence for PodGroups

> To ensure a deterministic processing sequence, child groups under a

Reviewer: What is the motivation to keep deterministic sequence on purpose? The scheduler might be able to schedule the group with a different order rather.

Reviewer 3: First, I think it's important to distinguish between two different concepts here:

1. Trying multiple evaluation orders (e.g., using backtracking or checking various permutations to find the best fit).

2. Keeping the evaluation order deterministic (ensuring the sequence remains strictly consistent across all phases within a single scheduling cycle).

We definitely want to explore the first point in Beta (e.g., backtracking or double-pass) to improve optimality of scheduler decisions. 

However, regarding the second point - determinism is something we really need to have. If the sequence fluctuates across different plugin extension points or simulations, we may hit very subtle and dangerous state inconsistencies. Note that this limitation currently exists even for standard, single-level heterogenous PodGroups where we check only single order. 

A great example of why we need this is how Workload Preemption works currently. To find the minimal set of victims, the algorithm first simulates preempting a broad set of pods, and then tries to reprieve them one by one. After each reprieval, it re-evaluates if the preemptor still fits.
If the evaluation order of pod groups changes randomly during this loop, the preemptor scheduling simulation will yield completely different results, leading to bizarre preemption behavior:

1. Check 1 (reprieving Victim X): The iteration order happens to be [PG-A, PG-B]. Under that order the CPG fits perfectly. The algorithm concludes Victim X can be safely spared.
2. Check 2 (reprieving Victim Y): The iteration order fluctuates to [PG-B, PG-A], which makes CPG unschedulable no matter whether victim Y is reprieved or not. The algorithm falsely concludes that Victim Y must be preempted.

Without a deterministic sequence, the preemption cost function is essentially comparing apples to oranges. The scheduler could end up over-preempting or deleting random victims just because it got unlucky with the evaluation order in that specific iteration.

Additionally, in the subsequent scheduling cycle (after victims are evicted), if the evaluation order changes again, the workload might remain unschedulable despite the the removed victims. In that case, NominatedNodeName (NNN) is no longer just an optimization, but a strict necessity to ensure the preemptor actually lands on the designated freed nodes - and that would be a dangerous path to take.

Reviewer: I was talking only about "1. Trying multiple evaluation orders". i.e., try rescheduling with a different order. Regarding (2), Yes I agree that we should keep the same order within a single WAS sched cycle.

Reviewer 2: Point (1) is something we want (and should) explore, but let's postpone this to Beta.
This KEP is already really huge and we should focus on MVP that already delivers some value.

@brejman - can you please clarify thhis ^^ in the KEP?

Reviewer 4: I thought the two points in the beta graduation criteria already describe this case:

> - The recursive greedy scheduling search trade-offs are re-evaluated, and a
>   decision on incorporating advanced backtracking heuristics (such as
>   restricted search depth or bounded branches) is made to optimize scheduling
>   success rates for multi-level gangs.
> - A non-greedy `CompositePodGroup` scheduling cycle mode is introduced and
>   re-evaluated to mitigate resource stealing and gang deadlock occurrences
>   among sibling child groups in capacity-constrained environments.

Should I explicitly state "trying different evaluation orders" in the criteria?

Reviewer 2: For me the current wording is good enough.

  not trigger preemption in this cycle. Instead, it commits pod bindings for
  all successfully placed member pods (comprising the minimal gang and any
  extra pods that placed under Alpha's greedy pass). Any remaining member
  pods that failed scheduling are marked as `Unschedulable` and return to the
  scheduling queue, which subsequently places the entire root CPG hierarchy
  back into the queue for re-evaluation.
* **If the root-level scheduling policy is not satisfied:** If the recursive
  in-memory simulation fails to schedule at least `minGroupCount` child groups
  under a CPG tree, no pod bindings are committed in this pass.
  The scheduler then triggers the workload preemption at the root CPG level.
* **During subsequent cycles:** In subsequent scheduling cycles, when the CPG
  with pending extra or newly scaled member pods pop from the queue, the
  standard recursive scheduling algorithm is executed for the root CPG
  hierarchy (where these pending pods are evaluated under greedy rules along
  with the active tree). If the recursive algorithm fails to place any of
  these pending member pods, the scheduler triggers the preemption engine at

>   the root CPG level to release capacity.

Reviewer: I like this idea, but It is a bit unclear to me how the scheduler globally switches the greedy mode where pods can trigger preemption even if scheduled pods > minCount. The scheduler should not directly care about minCount because that is the responsiblity of gang plugin. So, we need sort of new extension point to switch the mode? And if so, what would be the clear interface on that?

Reviewer 3: We do not need a new extension point for this. The scheduler determines whether a hierarchy's scheduling policy is satisfied simply by checking if the `PlacementFeasible` call on the root CPG returns `Success`. This allows the scheduler to remain completely decoupled from the actual gang plugin logic (like `minCount` or `minGroupCount`). 

I've updated the KEP text in this section to make this mapping explicit.

Reviewer: still unclear on
> In summary, workload preemption is triggered at the root level if and only if:
the root-level `PlacementFeasible` returns `Unschedulable` (i.e., the scheduling
policy is not satisfied but is resolvable via preemption), OR the scheduling
policy is satisfied, the hierarchy was already scheduled in a previous cycle,
and there remain some pending member pods that the scheduler failed to place
in the current cycle.

The first half is ok, and what happens on the second half case?

So, when (C)PG is scheduled for the first time, PlacementFeasible will return Success at the point when minCount is satisfied. (C)PG will return to the queue with remaining pods that are unschedualble and not necessary for minCount. And, when this (C)PG is being scheduled again for the remaining pods and they require the preemption to find the place, which status PlacementFeasible will return? It needs to tell the preemption is required, right? So, it actually would return Unschedulabl?

Reviewer 11: > And, when this (C)PG is being scheduled again for the remaining pods and they require the preemption to find the place, which status PlacementFeasible will return? It needs to tell the preemption is required, right? So, it actually would return Unschedulabl?

How I envision it, even for standard PodGroup schedulingm is that in the subsequent cycles we can check the scheduler's cache, whether the (C)PG has any already scheduled pods or not. If yes, it means we are in a subsequent cycle and, even when `PlacementFeasible` returns `Success`, but some pods were unschedulable, WAP should be tried.

Reviewer 11: So, we'll have cases like:
- Initial scheduling (empty ScheduledPods in cache) + PlacementFeasible Success = bind schedulable pods, reject unschedulable pods
- Initial scheduling + PlacementFeasible Unschedulable = try WAP
- Subsequent scheduling (non-empty ScheduledPods in cache) + PlacementFeasible Success + all pods schedulable = bind pods
- Subsequent scheduling + PlacementFeasible Success + some pods unschedulable = try WAP
- Subsequent scheduling + PlacementFeasible Unschedulable = try WAP

Reviewer: > If yes, it means we are in a subsequent cycle and, even when PlacementFeasible returns Success, but some pods were unschedulable, WAP should be tried.

But, then what if minCount is increased? We should not run WAP at PlacementFeasible Success, while there's some running pods which were scheduled before minConut increase, No?

Reviewer 2: I think we should prioritize for simplicity and understandability here - and it shouldn't matter if minCount has changed in the meantime or not.
What should matter is only whether the (C)PG is already scheduled or not.

If the minCount was increased in the meantime, indeed it may happen that we might be able to schedule some pods without preemption to satisfy minCount first. But it's not different even without minCount changes - some of the pods could have been disrupted in the meantime and you might be in the same sitation.

I believe that instead of introducing new corner cases, we should simplify the rules as much as we can and what @macsko described above is exactly what I was advocating for initially to balance for simplicity.

If we "denormalize" it, it effectively boils down to just 2 cases:
1. If PlacementFeasible Success &&
    (Initial Scheduling || (Subsequence Scheudling && all pods schedulable)) => bind schedulable pods
2. Else try WAP

Reviewer: I mean what you guys mentioned is good enough for alpha, Yes. But, if we aim at beta and further, that is too rough, no?

> But it's not different even without minCount changes - some of the pods could have been disrupted in the meantime and you might be in the same sitation.

Yes, correct, that is another scenario. Therefore, I am asking, shouldn't we somehow get the decision of whether we should switch to the greedy mode or not from the gang plugin, which has the business logic around minCount vs num of running pods.

Reviewer 2: I'm happy to revisit the decision if we have more data, but I actually claim that based on my knowledge this is good enough for Beta too.

My rationale (I described it somewhere before but can't find it now) is that, we should approach it from the perspective of the end workload.
Resizing the gang workload (which we're talking about here) generally requires some disruptive actions anyway (e.g. restart, resynchronization, etc.). So we want to minimize the number of times that we do that.
In other words - if the workload is already running, and I add 2 instances now and few seconds later after computing preemption I add yet another 3 instances, it's generally better to just wait those few seconds and first and then add all 5 instances at once. Because it's less disruptions for the workload.

I'm sure we can find usecases where the other would help, but most of those that I know belong to the category that I described above. So I rather think that we may want to provide some configuration options (per workload?) what's your desired behavior eventually, but to me that sounds like a follow-up improvement.

So in my mental model, the behavior described by Maciek above is actually not just Alpha hack, but also what we want to graduate with to Beta.

Reviewer: > if the workload is already running, and I add 2 instances now and few seconds later after computing preemption I add yet another 3 instances, it's generally better to just wait those few seconds and first and then add all 5 instances at once. Because it's less disruptions for the workload.

No? This KEP is talking about CPG - if you have multiple child gangs to care, you should prioritize to satisfy minCount on each child first, rather than trying to maximize number of pods on each gang that can be scheduled, which could make the latter child gang's pods harder to get scheduled and satisfy minCount. I mean, it is a general idea, regardless of whether the CPG gang is going thru the first admission or not, that it is a first priority to get minCount satisfied and leave all the remaining best-effort pods to the latter cycle (or we do the secondary scheduling path, like discussed in "Double-run in a single cycle").

Reviewer 4: I believe this should still be solvable if we compare PlacementFeasible at the root level before scheduling and after scheduling. We could trigger preemption if:

* Root-level PlacementFeasible is Unschedulable
* Root-level PlacementFeasible hasn't changed from unsuccessful to successful, and there are any remaining unscheduled pods, and it's a subsequent scheduling

The subsequent scheduling check here would only be relevant for basic policy, since for gangs PlacementFeasible should always return unschedulable with 0 scheduled pods.

If we don't need to decide now, I'd just add a general "Re-evaluate logic for triggering preemption for subsequent scheduling in case scheduling policy is not initially satisfied" to beta graduation criteria.

Reviewer 4: Updated beta graduation criteria with
> - The logic for triggering preemption for subsequent scheduling is re-evaluated in case
>  the scheduling policy is not initially satisfied (e.g., PG has been disrupted or `minCount`
 > has changed).

Reviewer 2: > if you have multiple child gangs to care, you should prioritize to satisfy minCount on each child first, rather than trying to maximize number of pods on each gang that can be scheduled, which could make the latter child gang's pods harder to get scheduled and satisfy minCount.

Agree with that. But that's orthogonal to what I said.
But I wasn't trying to say that we should schedule as many pods as possible from a given gang before going to the next one. What I was sayins is that if we can't schedule all pods, we should consider preemption instead of blindly binding some pods and triggering preemption immediately after to bind more pods.

Within preemption, I agree we should do what you wrote, but that's the inner thing - I was talking about the outer one :)

In summary, workload preemption is triggered at the root CPG level if and only
if: the CPG root scheduling policy is not satisfied, OR the policy is
satisfied and the hierarchy is already scheduled, but there are unschedulable

> member pods and none of them successfully scheduled in the scheduling cycle.

Reviewer 2: This isn't what we want (and it doesn't match what is described above).
For subsequent attempt, we should trigger preemption indepdendently if we found placement for some pods in the current cycle - we should always call it if there are any for which I didn't find a place.

Reviewer 3: Ok, let's keep it consistent with the current PG preemption triggering rules. I updated the summary and section above to make it clearer (hopefully).

Independently, we can discuss this condition offline, because I believe what I initially proposed might also have value in certain cases.

###### Inadmissible child groups
A root `CompositePodGroup` might successfully pass the `PreEnqueue` queue filter,
yet contain child groups that are currently inadmissible (e.g. they do not
have enough active member pods in the cluster queue to reach their `minCount`).
For example, consider a root CPG (`minGroupCount=3`) containing four nested child
groups, where the first three child groups are admissible, but the fourth `PG-4`
has only 2 pending pods out of its `minCount=5`.

In this situation, evaluating the inadmissible child groups during the recursive
scheduling cycle is futile: they cannot schedule, and if not handled correctly,
they will trigger a costly evaluation which will not be effective anyway.

To optimize performance, the scheduler will bypass evaluating futile child
groups:
* **Alpha:** Futile cycles are not skipped in the Alpha phase (admissibility
  checks on nested children are not executed).

> * **Beta:** We will implement branch-skipping heuristics by extending the

Reviewer: would be a new extension point like `PrePlacementFilter` that is executed before iterating/evaluating each pod in podgroup?

Reviewer 3: As explained in the text below, we can achieve the exact same branch-skipping behavior by simply calling the existing **`PlacementFeasible`** extension point *before* we attempt in-memory scheduling of a child group's placements (in addition to calling it after). 

Do you see any problems with that or other reasons for introducing a separate extension point?

Reviewer 11: This might require slight changes to how the PlacementFeasible is currently implemented, because it tracks the number of invocations to determine the number of processed pods during the cycle.
cc @brejman

Reviewer: ok, using PlacementFeasible actually makes sense

challenge for complex, constrained layouts. Instead, we focus on ensuring that
the most common and typical use-cases work out-of-the-box: scenarios
where the minimum constraints equal the actual size (`minCount = actualCount`
and `minGroupCount` equals the total child group count). Under this standard
baseline, this problem doesn't exist.

For the **Beta** release, we will evaluate two distinct alternatives to solve
resource stealing for arbitrary, multi-level layouts:

* **Double-run in a single cycle:** The scheduler runs the recursive algorithm
  twice within a single scheduling cycle: a non-greedy pass first to place the
  minimal gang, followed by a greedy pass for extra pods. This approach is highly
  responsive; if active member pods are deleted and cause a scheduled CPG to
  fall below its minimum thresholds, a single active cycle can immediately
  recover the gang via a non-greedy pass. In terms of complexity, running two
  passes in a single cycle does not significantly degrade latency, since the CPU
  cost is strictly dominated by individual pod schedulings (each pod is
  still evaluated exactly once end-to-end in both models).

> * **Distinct scheduling cycles:** The scheduler runs a single non-greedy pass in the

Reviewer: I am ok to defer to beta about this point, but I like this option better right now.

  mode. This highest ancestor CPG node defines the indivisible preemption unit.
* **Adapt PreEnqueue and plugin lifecycles:** The `PreEnqueue` method of the
  `DefaultPreemption` plugin and internal queue backoff structures are extended
  to track pending root `PodGroupInfo` preemptors while they wait in the queue for
  their calculated victim evictions to successfully delete and free up cluster
  capacity.

#### Multi-level topology-aware scheduling

In single-level topology-aware scheduling ([KEP-5732]), the scheduler generates a flat list
of candidate placements for a leaf `PodGroup`, runs in-memory simulations across these
placements, and scores them using `PlacementScorerPlugins` to select the optimal placement.

For multi-level scheduling using `CompositePodGroups` (which do not own pods directly but
instead act as parents for nested `CompositePodGroups` or leaf `PodGroups`), the scheduler
resolves placements **recursively** down the hierarchy tree:

##### CompositePodGroup Scheduling Algorithm

The multi-level topology-aware scheduling (TAS) algorithm
(`podGroupSchedulingPlacementAlgorithm`) is a direct extension of the recursive

> `groupRecursiveSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` execution cycle defined in

Reviewer 11: nit: IIUC you would want to define the new algorithm, matching the name of default one
```suggestion
(`groupRecursiveSchedulingPlacementAlgorithm`) is a direct extension of the recursive
`groupRecursiveSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` execution cycle defined in
```

     with the highest score (`block-B`, score: 95).
   * It locks in the resolved placement path:
     `[CPG-root: block-B], [PG-1: rack-B1], [PG-2: rack-B2]`.
   * The scheduler commits the resolved layout and proceeds to bind the pods of
     `PG-1` and `PG-2` to their physical target nodes inside `block-B`.

##### Preemption in topology-aware scheduling

Workload preemption under topology constraints is the domain of [KEP-5710] (Workload-Aware Preemption) and [KEP-5732] (Topology-Aware Workload Scheduling).

Under KEP-6012, this topology-aware preemption behavior works for `CompositePodGroups` out-of-the-box without major changes, based on the following architectural factors:

1. **Decoupled Simulation Framework:** The preemption algorithm evaluates victim selection
by running in-memory simulations and invoking the workload's scheduling callback. The
algorithm is completely decoupled from the scheduling internals: it does not care whether
the callback is placing a single flat `PodGroup` or recursively resolving a
`CompositePodGroup` hierarchy.
2. **Pod-Bounded Performance Complexity:** The performance cost of scheduling (including

> preemption) simulations is dominated strictly by the total number of pods in the workload.

Reviewer 2: It may be dominated by the number of potential victims too (the cost of reprieval may be higher than the cost of scheduling in some cases).

The point you're trying to make here is that the structure of the workload doesn't really matter, right?

Reviewer 3: Yes, the point was that the nesting structure itself does not introduce computational overhead compared to a flat PodGroup with the exact same number of pods.

However, after thinking about this, I realized that while this holds for multi-level gangs, it does not apply to multi-level TAS. For multi-level TAS, the scheduler must recursively evaluate parent-child topology combinations, increasing the simulation cost compared to single-level TAS PGs. 

But I believe that the main point of this section remains valid: if preemption works for single-level TAS, we believe it should work out of the box for multi-level. That's theassumption for alpha, if we get signals that this is not true, we'll be optimizing in beta. I've updated this section. PTAL.

- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/scheduler/backend/cache`: `2026-05-20` - 84.9%
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/scheduler/framework`: `2026-05-20` - 73.0%
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/scheduler/framework/preemption`: `2026-05-20` - 76.5%
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/defaultpreemption`: `2026-05-20` - 89.6%
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/topologyaware`: `2026-05-20` - 91.5%
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/queuesort`: `2026-05-20` - 60.0%
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/scheduler/framework/runtime`: `2026-05-20` - 82.8%

##### Integration tests

We will create new integration tests (and extend the existing `PodGroup` integration test
suite in `test/integration/scheduler/`) to cover the hierarchical and multi-level aspects of
the CPG API and the recursive scheduling resolutions:

- **Multi-level TAS:**
  - Verify that the scheduler successfully schedules a hierarchical CPG workload's pods
	strictly on nodes satisfying the nested combination of topology constraints when valid
	placement paths exist.
  - Verify that scheduling fails for the CPG workload when the cluster state cannot satisfy
	the nested topology constraints.

> - **Multi-level Gang Scheduling:**

Reviewer 11: It would be good to also add some integration tests for queueing of CPGs

Reviewer 3: Good point. Added.

  restricted search depth or bounded branches) is made to optimize scheduling
  success rates for multi-level gangs.
- Scheduler bypasses futile scheduling cycles for inadmissible nested child
  groups during recursion by extending `PlacementFeasible` to execute checks
  prior to in-memory scheduling (to protect performance and avoid redundant
  preemption passes).
- A non-greedy `CompositePodGroup` scheduling cycle mode is introduced and
  re-evaluated to mitigate resource stealing and gang deadlock occurrences
  among sibling child groups in capacity-constrained environments.
- Support for differing group-level priorities across a single hierarchy tree
  under basic scheduling policies and separating queueing priority from
  preemption priority is re-evaluated.
- Support for mutating the `minGroupCount` specification of active
  `CompositePodGroup` objects and modifying group hierarchy linkages
  at runtime is re-evaluated.

#### GA

- TBD in for Beta release

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Standard procedures for features introducing new APIs and API fields should be used:

- `kube-apiserver` is required to be upgraded first before any other components

>   that use the new API.

Reviewer 2: Let's state clearly what components are involved in the feature (kube-apiserver & kube-scheduler)

Note that for beta it will also be kcm (e.g. for adding deleting the finalizer).

Reviewer 3: Done.

- Since the `CompositePodGroup` has dependency on the `Workload` API, the

>   feature gate for it needs to be enabled.

Reviewer 2: nit: add the FG name

Reviewer 3: Done.

- Similarly, preemption- and topology-specific fields of the `CompositePodGroup`

>   API depend on relevant feature gates to be enabled.

Reviewer 2: For preemption - we already merged that with Workload API. So we kind of get it for free.
For TAS - it's more tricky, because AFAIK we don't support hiding fields behind 2 FGs at the same time.

I'm wondering, if we shouldn't simplify the setup and simply say that CPG simply relies on all of:
- GenericWorkload & TopologyAwareScheduling FGs being enabled.

And revisiting that in Beta if needed.

Reviewer 3: I like it, I described this in ### Feature Enablement and Rollback section and added a link to it in this section.

- On downgrade, `kube-scheduler` should be downgraded first (to stop processing
  the new fields) before `kube-apiserver` is downgraded.

> Note that downgrade `kube-apiserver` will not result in clearing the new fields

Reviewer 2: Not just downgrade, also disabling the API.

Reviewer 3: Done.

for objects that already have them set in etcd. Therefore, existing

> `CompositePodGroup` objects remain in etcd but are ignored.

Reviewer 2: The new fields and CPG objects are kind of separate aspects - "therefore" is misleading here.
Let's clarify that both of these needs to be handled on API disablemenent/downgrade.

Reviewer 3: Done.

### Version Skew Strategy

The feature is limited to the control plane, so the version skew with nodes
(kubelets) doesn't matter.

For the API changes (introduction of `CompositePodGroup` API and the field
changes in the `PodGroup` and the `Workload` APIs), the old version of
components (in particular kube-apiserver) may not handle those. Thus, users
should not set those fields before confirming all control plane instances were
upgraded to the version supporting those.

For the multi-level scheduling features themselves, they are purely in-memory
features of `kube-scheduler`, so the skew doesn't really matter (as there is

> always only single kube-scheduler instance being a leader).

Reviewer 2: The leader might run the old version.
Please clarify what happens if scheduler runs an old version (and all apiservers run the new one and we start using the feature).

Reviewer 3: Done. This is an interesting aspect for TAS, which also applies to single-level TAS. I provided a recommendation, and I think we should update the TAS KEP similarly. PTAL

@44past4

co-location, but rely on a hierarchy to enforce holistic workload lifecycle
policies: requiring at least $N$ Prefill and $M$ Decode active groups to serve, and
ensuring that non-topological components (like frontend pods) share the preemption
fate of the core execution engines.

#### Replicated training jobs under JobSet

As an infrastructure operator running complex training pipelines, I want to schedule
a multi-stage `TrainJob` under `JobSet` containing replicated sub-jobs with varied
scheduling requirements. For instance, the pre-training data initialization stage
can use a basic scheduling policy (starting as soon as some data-downloaders are
ready), while the subsequent core Trainer stage (MPI Launcher and workers) requires
strict gang scheduling. Both stages belong to the same parent CPG to coordinate
coordinated start and collective preemption fate-sharing.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.

> -->

Reviewer 12: The Workload group-template hierarchy  supports up to 4 levels(depth). 
The `CompositePodGroupTemplates` and `PodGroupTemplates`  lists are each capped at 8 items.

Should we mention them here as constraints/limitations?

Reviewer 3: Done.

   the template that the `PodGroup` object refers - and if not, reject the
   `PodGroup`.

Initially, we planned to extend the scope of that admission plugin to perform
analogous checks for the incoming `CompositePodGroups`. However, this plugin was
removed in the early stage of the 1.37 release cycle[^9] because of the
performance-related concerns and the fact that cross-object admission
enforcement is always best effort.

## Infrastructure Needed (Optional)

<!--
Use this section if you need things from the project/SIG. Examples include a
new subproject, repos requested, or GitHub details. Listing these here allows a
SIG to get the process for these resources started right away.
-->

[^1]: `JobSet` API documentation: https://jobset.sigs.k8s.io/docs/overview/.

[^2]: `LeaderWorkerSet` API documentation: https://lws.sigs.k8s.io/docs/overview/.

[^3]: https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/nvlink/.

[^4]: Details about the disaggregated inference pattern: https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/glossary/disaggregated-serving/.

[^5]: [PodGroup as top-level object](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zVdNyMGuSi861Uw16LAKXzKkBgZaICOWdPRQB9YAwTk/edit?tab=t.0).

> [^7]: [Proposed Workload API v2](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14XqPIdFhpgBW8hL8zTQ9KrqJAq_Hy1rOawITWqQ8T9c/edit?tab=t.0).

Reviewer 12: 6？

Reviewer 3: Done.

As an AI researcher running AI training jobs on newer generation TPUs, I want to
schedule a distributed training job such that individual shards run within
specific 4x4x4 cubes, while the entire workload is guaranteed to live within a
single superslice (e.g., 8x8x16). This allows me to leverage the specific
hierarchical network topology of TPU clusters for optimal training performance.

#### Disaggregated serving under LeaderWorkerSet

As a machine learning engineer deploying disaggregated serving (prefill and
decode stages) under `LeaderWorkerSet`, I want to express complex dependencies across
heterogeneous worker groups. Both stages require single-level high-bandwidth topology
co-location, but rely on a hierarchy to enforce holistic workload lifecycle
policies: requiring at least $N$ Prefill and $M$ Decode active groups to serve, and
ensuring that non-topological components (like frontend pods) share the preemption
fate of the core execution engines.

#### Replicated training jobs under JobSet

As an infrastructure operator running complex training pipelines, I want to schedule
a multi-stage `TrainJob` under `JobSet` containing replicated sub-jobs with varied

> scheduling requirements. For instance, the pre-training data initialization stage

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
scheduling requirements. For instance, the pre-training data and model initialization stage
```

Reviewer 4: Updated

significantly amplified when scheduling the much larger, hierarchical workload trees enabled
by the `CompositePodGroup` API.

*Mitigation:* This is a fundamental limitation of solving an NP-complete problem within a
heuristic-based scheduling loop. In Beta and future releases, we will utilize real-world
user feedback to incrementally refine and locally optimize scheduling heuristics for
specifically reported use cases.

#### Consistency and Validity Across Decoupled Hierarchy Objects

Because the scheduling hierarchy is represented using separate, decoupled runtime objects
(`CompositePodGroup` and `PodGroup`), there is a risk of declaring conflicting, malformed,
or cyclic configurations (such as cyclic parent references, excessive nesting depth, or
diverging priorities) that cannot be reliably prevented by API admission.

*Mitigation:* The static template definition within `Workload` will enforce unique names and
a depth limit of 4 levels at admission time. In the runtime group hierarchy,
`kube-scheduler` will detect invalid states (such as cycles, excessive depth, or priority
divergence) during the scheduling cycle, immediately mark the affected groups as invalid via

> status Conditions, and skip scheduling their constituent Pods to maintain cluster stability

Reviewer 5: Why we do this validation during the scheduling cycle but not during the webhook validation admission cycle?
Can we just check the Workload template to ensure that CPGs don't have any cycles or priority divergence?

Reviewer 4: I believe your question may be answered by https://github.com/tosi3k/enhancements/blob/cadd767aceb905d2d9f34f127614e043eebbe51e/keps/sig-scheduling/6012-composite-podgroup-api/README.md?plain=1#L2346

Reviewer 5: I see, so due to performance reasons we decided to not introduce such validation.

Reviewer 2: It's not really performance - it's rather correctness.
Admission wouldn't protect us from the races, so we need it at runtime level anyway (in scheduler).
And give we need it there, the admission wouldn't give us much visible benefit anyway.

	// +k8s:listMapKey=name
	// +k8s:maxItems=8
	// +k8s:immutable
	PodGroupTemplates []PodGroupTemplate
}
```

Policy- and constraints-related fields were omitted from the template definition
for brevity and clarity - we will discuss them in detail in the deep dive
section about the `CompositePodGroup` below. These fields have matching
structure and semantics as the fields in `CompositePodGroupTemplate` and their
values are supposed to be copied from the template on the `CompositePodGroup`
creation.

### Changes to the `PodGroup` API

There are two changes to the `PodGroup` spec:

- `PodGroupTemplateRef` field gets replaced with an optional `WorkloadRef` that
  contains a reference to the `Workload` together with a name of a template
  within that `Workload` object.
- New field called `ParentCompositePodGroupName` is added which denotes a name
  of an optional parent `CompositePodGroup` object.

```go
// PodGroupSpec defines the desired state of a PodGroup.
type PodGroupSpec struct {
	// ... existing fields ...

	// WorkloadRef references an optional PodGroup template within the Workload
	// object that was used to create the PodGroup.
	// This field is immutable.
	//
	// +optional

> 	// +k8s:optional

Reviewer 5: Why WorkloadRef field is optional for PodGroup?
I thought PodGroups must always reference the existing Workload.

Reviewer 14: There could be standalone PodGroups that don't have a Workload

https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-scheduling/5832-decouple-podgroup-api/README.md#support-both-embedded-and-standalone-podgroup

Reviewer 5: Given that we moved this to an alternative section, are we planning to extend it later?

Reviewer 2: > https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-scheduling/5832-decouple-podgroup-api/README.md#support-both-embedded-and-standalone-podgroup

This is a different thing - let's not mix it here.

Getting back to the original question of "why WorkloadRef field is optional for PodGroup".

If your workload is very simple (like in case of a Job we have just a single PodGroup with all the pods from the Job), there is very little value from the Workload object itself - it's more of an overhead.
And so we got few independent feedbacks in then late 1.35/early 1.36 timeframe that when attempting to take advantage of simple gang-scheduling - PodGroup gives you all you need and the need to set the template (often to a fake non-existing Workload object) is just a friction point.

So we decided to allow for that to reduce friction of those usecases and simplify adoption for those simplest usecases.
It's not a recommended pattern, but it makes sense to reduce the friction in such case.

Reviewer 5: Thanks for sharing background @wojtek-t, that makes sense.
Are we planning to allow creation of standalone PodGroup in the future?

Reviewer 2: We do allow it now and we want to continue allowing it for the simplest usecases.

For now, we're NOT planning to allow for standalone CompositePodGroups though.

	// +k8s:immutable
	WorkloadRef *WorkloadReference `json:"workloadRef"`

	// ParentCompositePodGroupName contains the name of the parent composite pod group
	// within the same namespace as this pod group.
	// If it's nil, then this pod group is a root of a workload's hierarchy.
	// This field is used only when the CompositePodGroup feature gate is enabled.
	// This field is immutable.
	//
	// +featureGate=CompositePodGroup
	// +optional
	// +k8s:ifDisabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:forbidden
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:optional
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:immutable
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:format=k8s-long-name
	// +k8s:ifEnabled(CompositePodGroup)=+k8s:dependentRequired("workloadRef")
  

> 	ParentCompositePodGroupName *string `json:"parentCompositePodGroupName"`

Reviewer 5: Wouldn't it make sense to move  ParentCompositePodGroupName under WorkloadReference struct?
Then we can have all reference in a single place:
```
workloadName
podGroupTemplateName
parentCompositePodGroupTemplateName
```

Reviewer 4: We can discuss this during API review

Reviewer 2: > Wouldn't it make sense to move ParentCompositePodGroupName under WorkloadReference struct?

I don't think it's desired:
1) parent is part of the "runtime" structure
2) workloadRef is a reference to "template"

Those are two separate things and mixing them together would be misleading.

Reviewer 5: I see, that makes sense then.

}
```

#### `WorkloadReference`

`WorkloadReference` contains information about the referred `Workload` and the
reference to the template definition embedded in that `Workload` object that was
used to create that particular `PodGroup`.

```go
// WorkloadReference references the Workload object together with the template
// that was used to create a particular PodGroup or CompositePodGroup.
type WorkloadReference struct {
	// WorkloadName is the name of the Workload object that contains a template
	// that was used when creating a pod group or a composite pod group. It must
	// be a DNS name.
	// This field is immutable.
	// This field is required.
	//
	// +required
	// +k8s:required
	// +k8s:immutable
	// +k8s:format=k8s-long-name
	WorkloadName string

	// TemplateName is the name of a template within the Workload object that

> 	// was used to create a pod group or a composite pod group. It must be a DNS label.

Reviewer 5: Why this reference to PodGroupTemplate **OR** to CompositePodGroupTemplate?

I thought ParentCompositePodGroupName represents relationship to the CPG.

Reviewer 4: `ParentCompositePodGroupName` represents the parent CPG of the particular PG/CPG.

`WorkloadReference.TemplateName` represents the CPG/PG template used to create the particular PG/CPG.

Reviewer 5: That makes sense. Do we consider separate them between two API fields, and validate if only one of two is set? Given that `CPGTemplates` and `PGTemplates` are separated in the `WorkloadSpec` ?

```yaml
workloadRef:
  podGroupTemplateName: ....
  or
  compositePodGroupTemplateName: ....
```

Of we prefer to define them under TemplateSpec?

Reviewer 4: I think having single `TemplateName` is sufficient since we know if the current object is CPG or PG (CPG should refer to CPGT, PG should refer to PGT), and we can find the template within the workload referenced by the WorkloadName

// should be scheduled using all-or-nothing semantics.
type GangGroupSchedulingPolicy struct {
	// MinGroupCount is the minimum number of child groups that must be schedulable
	// or scheduled at the same time for the scheduler to admit the entire group.
	// It must be a positive integer.
	//
	// +optional
	// +k8s:required
	// +k8s:minimum=1
	// +k8s:immutable
	MinGroupCount int32
}
```

##### Scheduling constraints

Analogously to `PodGroup`, we can specify topology constraints that need to be
taken into account when scheduling a `CompositePodGroup`.

```go
// CompositePodGroupSchedulingConstraints defines scheduling constraints (e.g. topology)
// for a CompositePodGroup.
type CompositePodGroupSchedulingConstraints struct {
	// Topology defines the topology constraints for the composite pod group.
	// Currently only a single topology constraint can be specified. This may change in the future.
	//
	// +optional
	// +listType=atomic
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:maxItems=1
	// +k8s:listType=atomic
	Topology []TopologyConstraint
}
```

Despite having a separate structure storing the constraints for the
`CompositePodGroup` API, we will reuse the `TopologyConstraint` struct that is

> already used in the `PodGroupSchedulingConstraints` type.

Reviewer 5: Any particular reason to use same struct for TopologyConstraint? What if we evolve this API in a way that CPG and PG should have different Topology fields?

Reviewer 2: TopologyConstraint doesn't define the workload-specific thing - it is an infrastructure-oriented thing.
So it just can't evolve differently, because it operates on a different layer.

in a top-down manner. This means that such constraints should be ordered from
least constrictive ones to to the ones defining the smallest topology domains.

##### Disruption mode, priority class name and priority

The idea of disruption mode generalizes naturally to the `CompositePodGroup`
API:

```go
// DisruptionMode defines how individual entities within a composite pod group can be disrupted.
// Exactly one mode must be set.
// +union
// FOR API REVIEW: Alternative Names: GroupDisruptionMode
type CompositeDisruptionMode struct {
	// Single specifies that children can be disrupted independently from each other.
	//
	// +optional
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:unionMember
	Single *SingleCompositeDisruptionMode

	// All specifies that all children can only be disrupted together.
	//
	// +optional
	// +k8s:optional
	// +k8s:unionMember
	All *AllCompositeDisruptionMode
}

// SingleCompositeDisruptionMode means that individual children of a CompositePodGroup
// can be disrupted or preempted independently.
// FOR API REVIEW: Alternative Names: SingleGroupDisruptionMode
type SingleCompositeDisruptionMode struct {

> 	// This is intentionally empty.

Reviewer 5: We make them separate structs because we might evolve the API in the future with new fields?

Reviewer 2: Right. Or at least we don't know if we will not need that in the future.

member groups and pods within a single group hierarchy tree **must share the exact
same priority and PriorityClassName**. Support for differing group-level
priorities under basic scheduling policies will be explored for the **Beta**
release.

The value of the `Priority` field is being used in the following two contexts:

- `CompositePodGroup` objects without a parent reference are being put in the
  scheduling queue. Their priority is taken into account by the PrioritySort
  plugin when determining the importance of scheduling unit.
- When running preemption to fit a `CompositePodGroup` in the cluster, only
  preemption units (individual `Pods` or `PodGroups` or `CompositePodGroups`) with a
  lower priority than the preemptor can be selected as prospective victims.

#### Status

Analogous to `PodGroupStatus`, `CompositePodGroupStatus` represents the observed state of a `CompositePodGroup`.

```go
// CompositePodGroupStatus represents information about the status of a composite pod group.
type CompositePodGroupStatus struct {
	// Conditions represent the latest observations of the CompositePodGroup's state.
	//
	// Known condition types:

> 	// - "CompositePodGroupInitiallyScheduled": Indicates whether the overall scheduling requirement

Reviewer 5: Do we want to be consistent with PG: https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/master/scheduling/v1alpha3/types.go#L481?
```suggestion
	// - "CompositePodGroupScheduled": Indicates whether the overall scheduling requirement
```

Reviewer 11: The condition name will be changed in v1.37 to be make more clear, that it only describes the initial scheduling status. See Workload API KEP: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/770b4c0718cf5deab7342d2c7697f27a0aa1aa34/keps/sig-scheduling/4671-gang-scheduling/README.md?plain=1#L736

Reviewer 5: Looks good.

2. Controller (e.g. `JobSet` controller) creates the Workload object,
3. Controller creates all groups in the scheduling hierarchy, from root
   (`CompositePodGroup`) to leaves (`PodGroups`),
4. Workload's Pods are getting created (by e.g. the Job controller),
5. kube-scheduler tends to scheduling the Pods,
6. User deletes the true workload,
7. Pods are deleted by the GC controller in kube-controller-manager,
8. Groups in the scheduling hierarchy are deleted by the GC controller, from
   leaves to the root.

#### Object ownership and garbage collection

`Workload` and `PodGroup` objects continue to be owned by true workloads. Same
approach is applied to the `CompositePodGroup` objects.

To ensure "bottom-up" garbage collection of the scheduling groups hierarchy, we
extend the idea introduced in [KEP-4671] that leverages finalizers to
additionally take `CompositePodGroups` into account. Specifically:

- the `PodGroupProtection` admission plugin adds a dedicated finalizer to newly
  created `CompositePodGroups`,
- the `PodGroup` protection controller removes that finalizer from a
  `CompositePodGroup` when it has a deletion timestamp and no child groups exist

>   for that `CompositePodGroup` anymore.

Reviewer 5: This is interesting.
Do we need to add OwnerReference from the child to parent groups?
Similar to how we suggest to add OwnerReference for PodGroups to Workload object.

Reviewer 4: The way I see it is (C)PG has a reference to workload through WorkloadRef, and a reference to parent through ParentCompositePodGroupName.

OwnerReference references the controllers / "true" workloads (e.g. JobSet).

@wojtek-t can you confirm?

Reviewer 2: > The way I see it is (C)PG has a reference to workload through WorkloadRef, and a reference to parent through ParentCompositePodGroupName.

+1

> OwnerReference references the controllers / "true" workloads (e.g. JobSet).

Partially true - we should generalize exactly the same thing we did for PodGroups & Pods:

https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-apps/5547-integrate-workload-with-job#ownerreferences-relationship

1) all objects have OwnerRef to true workload
2) all objects have OwnerRef to their parent in the structure (Pod to PG, PG to CPG)
3) root CPG has an OwnerRef to the Workload

   * **`S`**: The count of child elements successfully scheduled in memory with the
     `Success` status.
   * **`R`**: The count of remaining, untried child elements that are potentially
     admissible.
   * **`U`**: The count of child elements that returned an `Unschedulable` status.
   * **`UU`**: The count of child elements that returned `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable`.

   Using these variables, the `PlacementFeasible` status is resolved as follows:
   * **`Success`**: $S \ge M$. The constraints are fully satisfied.
   * **`Wait`**: $S < M$, but $S + R \ge M$. Currently unsatisfied, but satisfying the
     constraints purely with free capacity remains possible.
   * **`Unschedulable`**: $S + R < M$, but $S + R + U \ge M$. The constraints cannot
     be satisfied purely with free capacity, but triggering preemption on behalf of
     the `Unschedulable` child elements can resolve the constraints.
   * **`UnschedulableAndUnresolvable`**: $S + R + U < M$. Even with maximum preemption
     of all `Unschedulable` elements, it is mathematically impossible to satisfy the
     minimum constraints because there is not enough child elements to schedule

>      or too many child elements failed with the `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable` status.

Reviewer: GitHub is pretty bad to continue the discussion on the old thread. Opening a new thread here about the preemtpion and UnschedulableAndUnresolvable. (cc @wojtek-t @macsko)

Quoting your example scenario-

> Here are the examples for a CPG with MinGroupCount=10:
> - If we have less than 10 children or we have 12 but we get UnschedulableAndUnresolvable for the first 3 children, we return UnschedulableAndUnresolvable. Preemption will not help.
> - If we have 10 children and we get Unschedulable for the first child, we return Unschedulable. It doesn't make sense to process this CPG anymore (since it cannot be scheduled), but preemption may help here, so we should trigger it.
> - If we have 12 children and we get Success for the 1st child and UnschedulableAndUnresolvable or Unschedulable for the 2nd and 3rd child, we return Wait. It is still mathematically possible to schedule the CPG using the free capacity in the cluster.
> - If we have 12 children, once we successfully schedule 10 children, we return Success.
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6017#discussion_r3341092741

It looks intuitively correct and it is _only if we can return a trustable UnschedulableAndUnresolvable that correctly means "this podgroup or pod will never be schedualble by WAP"_ -- that is the point. So, basically, UnschedulableAndUnresolvable is propagated from each pod scheduling cycle (like, pod was rejected by UnschedulableAndUnresolvable -> podgroup was rejected by UnschedulableAndUnresolvable from this PlacementFeasible if enough pods are rejected by UnschedulableAndUnresolvabl -> ...). 
The whole point is whether UnschedulableAndUnresolvable from each pod scheduling cycle does mean anything for WAP. Under the current definition of UnschedulableAndUnresolvable, even if a pod got UnschedulableAndUnresolvable on the scheduling cycle, it _only_ means "this pod will never be schedualble by deleting any running pod under this cluster state". Given that there could be bunch of pods being assumed before this pod is evaluated, UnschedulableAndUnresolvable is not trustable - Those earlier pods being assumed might be placed somewhere else at the scheduling evaluation after deleting all possible victims in WAP, and this pod that got UnschedulableAndUnresolvable could be schedualble under WAP scheduling evaluation.

---

This part needs a discussion with @Argh4k. There was a similar discussion on WAP KEP.
https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C0AHLJ0EAEL/p1780063762360259

Actually though, this PlacementFeasible change (at least around this UnschedulableAndUnresolvable) might be better to discuss about UnschedulableAndUnresolvable part on WAP KEP?

Reviewer 11: > Given that there could be bunch of pods being assumed before this pod is evaluated, UnschedulableAndUnresolvable is not trustable - Those earlier pods being assumed might be placed somewhere else at the scheduling evaluation after deleting all possible victims in WAP, and this pod that got UnschedulableAndUnresolvable could be schedualble under WAP scheduling evaluation.

IIUC, Matt meant to only return UnschedulableAndUnresolvable for a (C)PG when first X pods got this status. Then, there isn't a case of assuming earlier pods, because nothing was successfully scheduled yet in this scheduling cycle. Since we keep the consistent order of pods throughout the cycle, when first X pods return UnschedulableAndUnresolvable, any preemption won't help, because in the WAP, the simulation will start from these X pods.

Reviewer 6: Tbh I would like to discuss the UnschedulableAndUnresolvable a little bit more. You said that: 
> Under the current definition of UnschedulableAndUnresolvable, even if a pod got UnschedulableAndUnresolvable on the scheduling cycle, it only means "this pod will never be schedualble by deleting any running pod under this cluster state".

Is that 100% correct? Looking at the code and comments, actually we have:
> UnschedulableAndUnresolvable is used when a plugin finds a pod unschedulable and other postFilter plugins like preemption would not change anything.

So it's not only about removing some pods in the preemption. It basically disables all PostFilter plugins. So in my mind this should be used only for cases that cannot be handled by scheduler and I would say that `Those earlier pods being assumed might be placed somewhere else at the scheduling evaluation after deleting all possible victims in WAP,` should not change the output of the plugin from UnschedulableAndUnresolvable.

I would argue that we should actually use the same approach as described here, in the single PodGroup algorithm, mainly if Unschedulable + Scheduled  < MinCount  (because of UnschedulableAndUnresolvable ) we do not run PostGroupPostFilter at all.

We should clearly document that in heteregenous pod groups there can be a corner case which you described but I think that it actually is a case of the NP problem that you touched in other comment rather than something that wap should solve.

Reviewer: > IIUC, Matt meant to only return UnschedulableAndUnresolvable for a (C)PG when first X pods got this status. Then, there isn't a case of assuming earlier pods, because nothing was successfully scheduled yet in this scheduling cycle. Since we keep the consistent order of pods throughout the cycle, when first X pods return UnschedulableAndUnresolvable, any preemption won't help, because in the WAP, the simulation will start from these X pods.

Ok - If **first** pods got UnschedulableAndUnresolvable in a row, then Yes, it is correct to say UnschedulableAndUnresolvable is trustable as a signal for "preemption won't work". Maybe a good first step for alpha, but looks like too specific scenario? 

I would like to redefine UnschedulableAndUnresolvable so that we can use UnschedulableAndUnresolvable from pods even if some pods are successfully scheduled/assumed before them.

> Is that 100% correct? 

Well, you can say the "official" definition is what the code comment says. But, it is fairly correct to say, _practically speaking,_ UnschedulableAndUnresolvable means "this pod will never be schedualble by deleting any running pod under this cluster state" because we assume the scheduler has the default preemption plugin enabled at PostFilter.

(We can say that this UnschedulableAndUnresolvable's "official" definition is pretty bad, regardless of WAS/WAP initiative, because you cannot/shouldn't assume which PostFilter plugins are enabled on the scheduler. And, if you don't assume that, you cannot know when to return UnschedulableAndUnresolvable.)

> I would say that `Those earlier pods being assumed might be placed somewhere else at the scheduling evaluation after deleting all possible victims in WAP`, should not change the output of the plugin from UnschedulableAndUnresolvable.
...
I would argue that we should actually use the same approach as described here, in the single PodGroup algorithm, mainly if Unschedulable + Scheduled < MinCount (because of UnschedulableAndUnresolvable ) we do not run PostGroupPostFilter at all.

I don't agree. UnschedulableAndUnresolvable is defined based on the pod level preemption (again, practically speaking). I see no reason to keep it while ignoring the heteregenous PG cases. 

As I mentioned on slack thread, I do want to redefine UnschedulableAndUnresolvable rather. For example, can we change the definition of UnschedulableAndUnresolvable to `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable is returned when the scheduling result for this pod wouldn't be changed by any other running pods deletions/"placements"` ("placements" is the new part)? Then, regardless of where previous pods are assumed to, UnschedulableAndUnresolvable would be a trustable source to say "this pod would never be schedulable by preempting any running pods or placing any previously-evaluated pods to somewhere different.

Reviewer 11: > Ok - If **first** pods got UnschedulableAndUnresolvable in a row, then Yes, it is correct to say UnschedulableAndUnresolvable is trustable as a signal for "preemption won't work". Maybe a good first step for alpha, but looks like too specific scenario?
> 
> I would like to redefine UnschedulableAndUnresolvable so that we can use UnschedulableAndUnresolvable from pods even if some pods are successfully scheduled/assumed before them.

Given the size of the CPG KEP, I'd propose to defer the discussion about redefining UnschedulableAndUnresolvable to beta. Definitely, your idea seems good, but we would need to carefully analyze whtether the actual in-tree plugins could follow the new rule easily or not.

Reviewer 4: Which KEP should this redefinition a part of? What behavior should we implement in alpha? Technically, we can omit UnschedulableAndUnresolvable case completely, and accept potentially futile preemption evaluations.

Reviewer 4: To summarize:

1. Current definition of UnschedulableAndUnresolvable for pods isn't precise enough to be useful and doesn't scale well to pod groups and WAP
2. Changing the definition may not be as simple as it seems and we'd prefer avoid doing it in 1.37
3. At the same time, we want to reduce futile WAP evaluations to keep reasonable performance for multi-level workloads

For alpha, we could keep the "untrustable" status of pod's UnschedulableAndUnresolvable and only return UnschedulableAndUnresolvable from **pod group's** PlacementFeasible if $S + R + U + UU < M$.

However, for **CPG's** PlacementFeasible, we can trust pod group's UnschedulableAndUnresolvable (since we are just now defining it) and return UnschedulableAndUnresolvable if $S + R + U < M$.

This would allow us to skip at least some WAP evaluations.

In beta graduation criteria I can add something like "Redefine pod's UnschedulableAndUnresolvable status to make it possible to propagate it through GangScheduling's PlacementFeasible".

Alternative solutions:

1. Redefine UnschedulableAndUnresolvable
2. Always count $S + R + U + UU < M$ in GangScheduling's PlacementFeasible, increasing WAP false-positives (i.e. WAP will trigger more often than needed)
3. Always count $S + R + U < M$ in GangScheduling's PlacementFeasible, increasing WAP false-negatives (i.e. WAP will trigger less often than needed)

Reviewer: ok, I agree with what you said, @brejman. Your suggestion looks better than alternatives that you mentioned lastly.

Reviewer 4: Updated the doc to differentiate the logic for leaf-level `PlacementFeasible` and added unification of this logic to beta graduation criteria

  The scheduler triggers the workload preemption engine at the root level of
  the hierarchy to release cluster capacity for the failed member pods.
* **If the root-level `PlacementFeasible` returns `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable`:** If
  the simulation reveals that the constraints are mathematically impossible to
  satisfy (even if maximum preemption is used, e.g. due to hard node selectors or
  lack of admissible member pods), the scheduler does not commit any bindings
  and does NOT trigger preemption. The scheduling cycle aborts early, saving
  wasteful CPU processing, and the hierarchy is sent back to the queue.
* **During subsequent cycles:** In subsequent scheduling cycles, when the root CPG
  with pending extra or newly scaled member pods pops from the queue, the
  standard recursive scheduling algorithm is executed for the root CPG
  hierarchy. If the recursive algorithm fails to place one or more of these
  pending member pods (i.e., there remain some unschedulable member pods), the
  scheduler triggers the preemption engine at the root CPG level to release
  capacity for the remaining unschedulable pods, even if some other pending pods

>   were successfully placed in the current cycle.

Reviewer 2: Can you please adjust it to make it consistent with this update:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6194

Reviewer 2: Same for the paragraph below.

Reviewer 4: Updated the WAP trigger condition for subsequent scheduling:

* for gang policy, we trigger preemption in case **any** of the remaining pending pods are not scheduled within the cycle
* for basic policy, we trigger preemption in case **all** of the remaining pending pods are not scheduled within the cycle

be promoted to conformance. These tests will cover `CompositePodGroup` creation,
validation, status updates and lifecycle management.

More tests will be added for beta release.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- New `CompositePodGroup` API is introduced behind the `CompositePodGroup`
  feature gate.
- New fields in `Workload` and `PodGroup` APIs are introduced behind the
  `CompositePodGroup` feature gate.
- Multi-level gang scheduling is supported.
- Multi-level gang disruption mode is supported.
- Multi-level topology-aware scheduling is supported.
- Initial e2e tests are implemented and enabled.

#### Beta

- `CompositePodGroup` object is protected against deletion if any group refers
  to it.
- At least one true workload controller (e.g. `JobSet`) is integrated with the
  `CompositePodGroup` API.
- Scheduler detects invalid runtime group hierarchies (i.e. hierarchies which
  are too deep, have a cycle, refer to two or more Workloads, or have an
  invalid combination of scheduling policies or disruption modes at different
  levels of the hierarchy).
- All e2e tests for the `CompositePodGroup` API are added and graduated to

>   conformance tests.

Reviewer 2: Gradution to conformance is only happening as part of GA (conformance can't rely on Beta APIs).
Please move the graduation part to GA.

Reviewer 4: Moved to GA criteria

control plane.

For each of these, fill in the following—thinking about running existing user workloads
and creating new ones, as well as about cluster-level services (e.g. DNS):
  - [Dependency name]
    - Usage description:
      - Impact of its outage on the feature:
      - Impact of its degraded performance or high-error rates on the feature:
-->

### Scalability

<!--
For alpha, this section is encouraged: reviewers should consider these questions
and attempt to answer them.

For beta, this section is required: reviewers must answer these questions.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

Yes.

Watching for CompositePodGroups:
  - API call type: LIST+WATCH CompositePodGroups
  - estimated throughput: < XX/s
  - originating component: kube-scheduler, kube-controller-manager (GC
    controller, PodGroup protection controller)

Status updates (potentially not in Alpha):
  - API call type: PUT/PATCH CompositePodGroups status
  - estimated throughput < XX/s

>   - originating component: kube-scheduler

Reviewer 2: Given that we already described that scheduler will be watching for Workloads for validation in Beta, let's just state it here too.

Reviewer 4: Updated

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

Yes:
  - API type: `CompositePodGroup`
  - Supported number of objects per cluster: XX,000
  - Supported number of objects per namespace: XX,000

The above numbers will eventually depend on the numbers for out-of-tree workload APIs
that will integrate with the new API (e.g. JobSets, LeaderWorkerSets, ...).

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

Yes - new fields are added to the `Workload` and `PodGroup` APIs.

The exact size increase will be small, however:

- `PodGroup` is extended with a single string field,
- Templates definition in the `Workload` object is evolved into a tree-like
  structure and we enforce an explicit limit on the depth and width of that

>   tree.

Reviewer 2: Please repeat the limitations here (depth=4, width=8)

Reviewer 4: Done

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) within one minor version of promotion to GA
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> This KEP describes the shift in the workload-aware scheduling architecture that

Reviewer 3: NIT: To me, this is more an "evolution" than a "shift"

Author: Done.

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP describes the shift in the workload-aware scheduling architecture that
is necessary to support more complex, hierarchical scheduling requirements of
modern high-performance distributed workloads. We focus on the API, framework
and the basic building blocks - handling really sophisticated multi-level

> scheduling requirements can come as a follow-up.

Reviewer 2: s/requirements/algorithms/ ?

We actually need to understand the requirements from the very beginning to ensure that we will not put ourselves into the corner.
What we can postpone is certain improvements on how optimal the algorithm is...

Author: Done.

To achieve this, the KEP builds on the `Workload` and `PodGroup` APIs from
[KEP-4671] and [KEP-5832] and introduces a new core API called
`CompositePodGroup`. This API allows expressing multi-level topology
constraints, gang scheduling and preemption policies for heterogeneous groups of
Pods and facilitates extending the Kubernetes scheduler with more policies in
the future.

## Motivation

Kubernetes 1.36 has made great strides in direction of evolving the process of
scheduling from a Pod-centric approach towards a workload-centric one. Thanks to
these efforts, we are now able to provide simple forms of gang scheduling and

> gang preemption policies using the `PodGroup` API introduced in [KEP-5832]. This

Reviewer 2: nit: We're merging the KEPs - so let's already link 4671 from the very beginning.

Author: Done.

Node labels-based topology constraints baked into the `PodGroup` and `Workload`
APIs ([KEP-5732]).

These features already cover the use cases of some simple batch workloads that
are characterized by a flat homogeneous structure. [KEP-5547] is an example of a
successful integration of the new APIs with the Job controller for a fully
parallel static indexed Job. That said, many modern distributed workloads,
especially the AI ones, contain some inherent hierarchy that often translates
into more complex scheduling needs that core Kubernetes cannot satisfy just yet.

One of the most apparent gaps today is the lack of multi-level topology-aware
scheduling. AI workloads require significant amount of Pod-to-Pod communication,
so the network bandwidth translates into the workload execution time, hence
higher cost of running such workloads. The bandwidth between the Pods depends
on their placement inside the data center and is highly correlated to the
proximity of the machines they are running on. Today's data centers are
frequently organized in a hierarchical structure - for instance, machines are
grouped in a rack, racks are grouped in a block and so on. Machines from the

> same rack are closer to each other than machines belonging to different racks.

Reviewer 2: It's not only proximity, but primarily it's about network topology, e.g. how many switches the request has to go through or do they have direct high-bandwidth connection.

Author: Rephrased that whole section anyway, so marking that as resolved.

Pods within a single `PodGroup` object. This prevents the users from properly
scheduling heterogeneous gangs as a hierarchical group gang because there is no
feasible way to express this intent at the moment. Supporting this kind of gang
scheduling policy is also a prerequisite for the multi-level topology-aware
scheduling. Similarly, current scheduling APIs do not provide support for the
preemption of a group gang or a preemption of a single group within a group
gang.

All of these gaps come from the fact that current scheduling APIs do not allow
expressing any kind of multi-level hierarchy that many out-of-tree Kubernetes
APIs are often characterized with. `JobSet`[^1] and `LeaderWorkerSet`[^2] are
probably the most popular instances of a higher-order API where such hierarchy
and homogeneity exists which bring about matching scheduling requirements like
the ones mentioned above. To close these gaps, we need to extend the
foundational scheduling APIs in a way that the true workload controllers can
express their multi-level scheduling requirements that kube-scheduler could
understand and act upon accordingly.

### Goals

> 

Reviewer 2: - Define the new API that allow for describing the hierarchy of the workload.
- Extend scheduling capabilities to support hierarchical scheduling requirements of workload, including:
   - gang scheduliing and ...
   - multi-level topology ...
- Ensure future extensibility of the API with new scheduling and disruption policies

Author: Done.

  workload APIs.
  - This will be addressed in a KEP spawned from a discussion in
    [API Design for WAS Controller Integration](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VG7Zto9JYuPG4Anb01WMRryJlfV6met0jgob3T2NjZ4/edit?usp=sharing).

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

TODO

### User Stories

#### Scheduling an AI training workload

As a data scientist, I want to schedule an AI training workload divided into
heterogeneous multi-Pod shards in an all-or-nothing fashion. I want to optimize
the network throughput and latency, therefore I would like to colocate the Pods
of my workload in a way that corresponds to the hierarchy in which the data
center which is about to host my workload is organized:

- The whole workload should be scheduled to run in a single availability zone,
- Homogeneous shards should be scheduled on the same rack,

> - Pods from the same shard should be scheduled on the same machine.

Reviewer 2: I'm not aware of any users that runs AI Training in non "pod-per-node" fashion.

This usecases sounds too artificial to me. Let's actually take the two real world examples:

1) TPU v7: https://docs.cloud.google.com/tpu/docs/tpu7x
- you want to run shards within individual 4x4x4 cubes
- however whole workload need to live in a single superslice, say 8x8x16

2) A similar usecase for GPU

Reviewer 5: I saw use-cases when
- Pods don't utilize the full GPUs, so multiple pods can use fraction of the same GPU (e.g. using mig or time-slicing).
- Same node is shared across multiple users or multiple jobs

Author: Reshaped the section to take those two AI training use cases - and added the use case for the disaggregated inference workloads.

AFAIK, sharing a node between Pods/workloads is a rather niche use case in AI - and changes we are going to do in scope of this KEP are going to cover that use case's needs as well, so I left it out in the current version of the "User Stories" section.

### Changes in kube-scheduler

#### Multi-level gang scheduling

Below we describe the high-level changes in `kube-scheduler` required to
support multi-level gang scheduling.

##### Prerequisites
To enable multi-level gang scheduling, we must extend the core scheduling queue
and introduce new group-level framework extension points:

1. **Scheduling Queue CPG Support:** The core scheduling queue is extended to
   natively support root `CompositePodGroups` (CPGs without a parent reference) as a new
   root scheduling unit. The `PrioritySort` plugin ordering logic is extended
   to these root units, sorting by the priority class of the root node of the
   active group hierarchy.
2. **`PreEnqueue` Extension Point:** Currently, this extension point is defined
   strictly at the individual `Pod` level. We add support for `PreEnqueue` at
   the `PodGroup` and `CompositePodGroup` levels to recursively determine if
   the group tree has enough active members to schedule before enqueuing.

> 3. **`PlacementFeasible` Extension Point:** Currently, this extension point

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by that? We don't have anything like that for now.

The `podGroupSchedulingDefaultAlgorithm` underneath is scheduling individual pods and feasibility is determined based on that.

Given it's repeating across the KEP below, please clarify what is that.

Reviewer 3: It's being introduced in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/138643. I write the KEP assuming it's already merged which should happen soon.

Reviewer 2: New extension point to me is important enough change that it should be described in a KEP. It doesn't have to be a dedicated KEP (a section in TAS KEP would be find, given it was motivated by the performance for TAS), but I don't think we should just introduce it via the code.
@sanposhiho @macsko @dom4ha @brejman

Reviewer 11: I introduced that extension point in the Gang Scheduling beta update: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6076 (in the Scheduling Algorithm section)

Reviewer 2: Too many things happening - it sounded familiar, but I didn't find it in the merged KEPS and code...

Reviewer 4: FTR the initial implementation PR for PlacementFeasible extension point is in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/138643

> simulated sequentially in their pre-sorted order without backtracking. If a
> child group placement (e.g. `PG-1`) consumes resources in a way that
> subsequently blocks its sibling (e.g. `PG-2`) from meeting its `minCount`
> minimum requirement, which in turn prevents the parent CPG from satisfying
> its `minGroupCount` threshold, the scheduler does not retroactively
> evaluate alternative placements for the earlier child group.
>
> Enforcing a greedy recursive choice without backtracking prevents exponential
> scheduling complexity at the cost of sub-optimal decisions that may trigger
> preemption. While sufficient for the **Alpha** phase, these greedy
> scheduling algorithm trade-offs will be re-evaluated for the **Beta**
> release to explore bounded backtracking heuristics (such as restricted
> search depth or bounded branches) that optimize overall scheduling success
> rates.

##### Scheduling sequence for PodGroups

To ensure a deterministic processing sequence, child groups under a
`CompositePodGroup` are sorted and cached inside the scheduling queue when the
group objects are added to queue memory. During the scheduling cycle, the

> scheduler evaluates descendant chuld groups in this pre-sorted order.

Reviewer 2: nit: s/chuld/child/

For the **Alpha** release, we can start with something simple, like e.g. sorting
`PodGroups` / `CompositePodGroups` by their creation timestamp, and changing that
that logic in beta if necessary.

###### Preemption triggering rules
Preemption is strictly evaluated and executed only at the root level of the group
hierarchy, preventing isolated and competing preemption passes at intermediate
levels.

To coordinate preemption, child subgroups under simulation recursively return
their status along with two distinct indicators to the parent node:
1. **`PlacementFeasible` (Boolean):** Indicates whether the subgroup met its minimum
   required quantity constraints (pods $\ge$ `minCount` or groups $\ge$ `minGroupCount`).
2. **`NeedsPreemption` (Boolean):** Indicates whether any pending member pods
   exceeding the minimum requirements could not be placed and require preemption.

At the end of the recursive simulation:
* If the root CPG returns `NeedsPreemption = True`, the scheduler executes preemption 

>   at the root CPG level to clear space for the extra pending members.

Reviewer 2: We already had a discussion about that in the primary gang scheduling KEP.
We ended up the decision about a separate cycle for preemption, described here:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/6076/changes#diff-66a435363bd97c47822812ed18406a349a1e9c8ccc85ca67347e4bb9b02a404bR1195-R1202

Please unify - we want to be consistent across those two.

Reviewer 3: Ok, I think I made it consistent. However, due to the amount of changes we'll need to do it this way, I find it as as "beta vision". For alpha, we'll likely need to simplify if we want to get everything merged before the KEP freeze. PTAL

have enough active member pods in the cluster queue to reach their `minCount`).
For example, consider a root CPG (`minGroupCount=3`) containing four nested child
groups, where the first three child groups are admissible, but the fourth `PG-4`
has only 2 pending pods out of its `minCount=5`.

In this situation, evaluating the inadmissible child groups during the recursive
scheduling cycle is futile: they cannot schedule, and if not handled correctly,
they will trigger a costly preemption algorithm pass which will also not
succeed.

To optimize performance, the scheduler will bypass evaluating futile child
groups:
* **Alpha:** Futile cycles are not skipped in the Alpha phase (admissibility
  checks on nested children are not executed).
* **Beta:** We will implement branch-skipping heuristics using one of
  the following approaches:
  - **PreEnqueue evaluation at recursion start:** At the beginning of the
    recursive `scheduleOneCompositePodGroup` method, the scheduler executes the
    `PreEnqueue` validation locally on the active subgroup. If the subgroup
    fails this admissibility check, the scheduling cycle (and preemption) for the

> 		branch is aborted immediately and .

Reviewer 2: unfinished sentence

This can lead to **resource stealing** in capacity-constrained clusters: an
early, greedy child group consumes all available slots, preventing a sibling
child group from reaching its `minCount` and causing the entire root CPG gang
to fail scheduling.

To resolve this, we will introduce a **non-greedy** scheduling cycle mode:
* **Alpha:** The scheduling cycle is greedy. Resource stealing in constrained
  hierarchies is a known limitation in the Alpha phase.
* **Beta:** We will implement a non-greedy simulation mode. During the initial
  scheduling of a CPG, the CPG-level `PlacementFeasible` checker will stop
  simulating extra pods once the `minGroupCount` subgroup limits are met. The
  CPG is committed, and subsequent cycles will process additional pods greedily
  once capacity is available.

###### Handling new pods for scheduled hierarchies
If new pods belong to an already scheduled `CompositePodGroup` tree (e.g., due to a
controller scaling up), the scheduler pops these pending pods from the queue
and triggers the recursive scheduling algorithm starting directly at the root CPG
level.

Because subsequent scheduling cycles for already scheduled CPG hierarchies run

> in greedy mode (active child groups/pods are evaluated past their `minCount` limits),

Reviewer 2: It doesn't have to be the case if some pods failed/were deleted/whatever in the meantime

Reviewer 3: Could you elaborate? Once a CPG gets scheduled for the first time, all subsequent cycles will be greedy (i.e., we don't stop processing children if `PlacementFeasible` returns `Success`). If some pods are deleted, I don't think anything changes. If a PG scheduling policy can no longer be met (e.g., we now have fewer than `MinCount` pods), `PlacementFeasible` will return `UnschedulableAndUnresolvable` and we'll skip scheduling this PG (and potentially the parent CPG, if its policy also cannot be met).

This is consistent with what we do for flat PGs. If we schedule a PG with 10 pods and `MinCount=10`, but then 3 pods are removed and only 2 are added, we won't schedule them because `MinCount` is not met. We do this to avoid wasting resources (by scheduling two extra pods that don't change anything) if we're unable to meet gang requirements.

Reviewer 11: So shouldn't we run the standard, two-pass algorithm when any (composite) pod group has less members than minCount to maximize the chance of making the (composite) pod group schedulable?

Reviewer 3: Good point. Ideally, we would alternate between a non-greedy cycle after failed gang scheduling (some gang conditions were not satisfied) and a greedy cycle after successful gang scheduling. 

Alternatively, we always run a two-pass algorithm. This is actually an argument for it.

Reviewer 2: Sorry - might have been more clear with my comment :)

> Alternatively, we always run a two-pass algorithm. This is actually an argument for it.

Yes - this is exactly where I was heading.
We can't always run greedy algorithm, because we may not be able to accommodate other pod groups.

But I would actually start with two-pass always - that makes it much simpler to reason about.
And if we need to optimize later, let's do that in a follow-up based on data.
